I thought the king had moreaffected
the Duke of Albany thanCornwall.
It did always seem so to us.
But now, in the division of thekingdom,
it appears not which of thedukes he values most,
for equalities are so weighedthat curiosity in neither
can make choice of either'smoiety.
Is not this your son, my lord?
His breeding, sir, hath been atmy charge.
I have so often blushed toacknowledge him
that now I am brazed to it.
I cannot conceive you.
Sir, this young fellow's mothercould,
whereupon she grew round-wombedand had, indeed, sir,
a son for her cradle
ere she had a husband for herbed.
Do you smell a fault?
I cannot wish the fault undone,the issue of it being so proper.
But I have, sir, a son by orderof law,
some year elder than this,
who yet is no dearer in myaccount.
Though this knave came somethingsaucily into the world
before he was sent for, yet washis mother fair.
There was good sport at hismaking,
and the whoreson must beacknowledged.
Do you know this noblegentleman, Edmund?
No, my lord.
My lord of Kent.
Remember him hereafter as myhonorable friend.
My services to Your Lordship.
I must love you and sue to knowyou better.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
He hath been out nine years, andaway he shall again.
The king is coming.
Attend the lords of France andBurgundy, Gloucester.
I shall, my liege.
Meantime, we shall express ourdarker purpose.
Give me the map there.
Know that we have divided inthree our kingdom,
and 'tis our fast intent
to shake all care and businessfrom our age,
conferring them on youngerstrengths
while we unburdened crawl towarddeath.
Our son of Cornwall and you,
our no less loving son ofAlbany,
we have this hour a constantwill
to publish our daughters'several dowers
that future strife may beprevented now.
The princes France and Burgundy,
great rivals in our youngestdaughter's love,
long in our court have madetheir amorous sojourn
and here are to be answered.
Tell me, my daughtersó
since now we will divest us bothof rule,
interest of territory, cares ofstateó
which of you shall we say dothlove us most,
that we our largest bounty mayextend
where nature doth with meritchallenge?
Goneril, our eldest-born, speakfirst.
Sir, I love you more than wordcan wield the matter;
dearer than eyesight, space, andliberty;
beyond what can be valued richor rare;
no less than life, with grace,health, beauty, honor;
as much as child e'er loved orfather found;
a love that makes breath poorand speech unable;
beyond all manner of so much Ilove you.
What shall Cordelia speak?
Love and be silent.
Of all these bounds, even fromthis line to this,
with shadowy forests and withchampaigns riched
with plenteous rivers andwide-skirted meads,
we make thee lady.
To thine and Albany's issues bethis perpetual.
What says our second daughter,
our dearest Regan, wife ofCornwall?
Speak.
I am made of that self metal
as my sister, and prize me ather worth.
In my true heart, I find shenames my very deed of love;
only she comes too short
that I profess myself an enemyto all other joys,
which the most precious squareof sense possesses,
and find I am alone felicitatein your dear highness' love.
Then poor Cordelia.
And yet not so, since I am sure
my love's more ponderous than mytongue.
To thee and thine, hereditaryever,
remain this ample third of ourfair kingdomó
no less in space, validity, andpleasure
than that conferred on Goneril.
Now, our joy,
although our last, not least,
to whose young love
the vines of France and milk ofBurgundy
strive to be interested.
What can you say to win a thirdmore opulent than your sisters'?
Speak.
Nothing, my lord.
Nothing?
Nothing.
Nothing will come of nothing;speak again.
Unhappy that I am, I cannotheave my heart into my mouth.
I love Your Majesty according tomy bond,
no more nor less.
How, how, Cordelia!
Mend your speech a little, lestyou may mar your fortunes.
Good my lord, you have begot me,bred me, loved me.
I return those duties back asare right fit,
obey you, love you, and mosthonor you.
Why have my sisters husbands ifthey say they love you all?
Haply, when I shall wed, thatlord whose hand
must take my plight
shall carry half my love withhim,
half my care and duty.
Sure, I shall never marry likemy sisters,
to love my father all.
But goes thy heart with this?
Ay, my good lord.
So young and so untender?
So young, my lord, and true.
Let it be so.
Thy truth, then, be thy dower,
for, by the sacred radiance ofthe sun,
the mysteries of Hecate and thenight,
by all the operation of the orbs
from whom we do exist and ceaseto be,
here I disclaim all my paternalcare,
propinquity, and property ofblood
and, as a stranger to my heartand me,
hold thee, from this, forever.
The barbarous Scythian, or hethat makes his generation messes
to gorge his appetite, shall tomy bosom be
as well neighbored, pitied, andrelieved
as thou, my sometime daughter.
Good my liege
Peace, Kent!
Come not between the dragon andhis wrath.
I loved her most
and thought to set my rest onher kind nursery.
Hence, and avoid my sight!
So be my grave my peace,
as here I give her father'sheart from her.
Call France! Who stirs?
Call Burgundy.
Cornwall, Albany.
With my two daughters' dowers,digest this third.
Let pride, which she callsplainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with mypower, preeminence,
and all the large effects thattroop with majesty.
Ourself, by monthly course,
with reservation of an hundredknights,
by you to be sustained,
shall our abode make with you bydue turns.
Only we will retain the name andall the addition of a king.
The sway, revenue, execution ofthe rest,
beloved sons, be yours,
which, to confirm, this coronetpart between you.
Royal Lear, whom I have everhonored as my king,
loved as my father, as my masterfollowed,
as my great patron thought on inmy prayersó
The bow is bent and drawn; makefrom the shaft.
Let it fall rather,
though the fork invade theregion of my heart.
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear ismad?
What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think'st thou that duty shallhave dread to speak
when power to flattery bows?
To plainness honor's bound whenmajesty falls to folly.
Reserve thy state
and, in thy best consideration,check this hideous rashness.
Answer my life my judgment,
thy youngest daughter does notlove thee least.
Nor are those empty-hearted
whose low sounds reverb nohollowness.
Kent, on thy life, no more.
My life I never held but as apawn
to wage against thine enemiesnor fear to lose it,
thy safety being motive.
Out of my sight!
See better, Lear, and let mestill remain
the true blank of thine eye.
Now, by Apollo
Now, by Apollo, King, thouswear'st thy gods in vain!
O, vassal! Miscreant!
Dear sir, forbear.
Kill thy physician,
and the fee bestow upon thy fouldisease.
Revoke thy gift
or, whilst I can vent clamorfrom my throat,
I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Hear me, recreant!
On thine allegiance, hear me!
Since thou hast sought to makeus break our vow,
which we durst never yet, and bystrained pride
to come betwixt our sentence andour power,
which nor our nature nor ourplace can bear,
our potency made good, take thyreward.
Five days we do allot thee forprovision
to shield thee from disasters ofthe world
and on the sixth to turn thyhated back
upon our kingdom.
If, on the tenth day following,
thy banished trunk be found inour dominions,
the moment is thy death.
Away!
By Jupiter, this shall not berevoked.
Fare thee well, King.
Sith thus thou wilt appear,
freedom lives hence, andbanishment is here.
The gods to their dear sheltertake thee, maid,
that justly think'st and hastmost rightly said.
And your large speeches may yourdeeds approve
that good effects may springfrom words of love.
Thus Kent, O princes, bids youall adieu.
He'll shape his old course in acountry new.
Here's France and Burgundy, mynoble lord.
My lord of Burgundy, we firstaddress toward you,
who, with this king, hathrivaled for our daughter.
What, in the least,
will you require in presentdower with her
or cease your quest of love?
Most Royal Majesty, I crave nomore
than hath your highness offered;nor will you tender less.
Right noble Burgundy, when shewas dear to us,
we did hold her so, but now herprice is fallen.
Sir, there she stands.
If aught within this littleseeming substance,
or all of it, with ourdispleasure pieced
and nothing more, may haply likeyour grace,
she's there, and she is yours.
I know no answer.
Will you, with these infirmitiesshe owes,
unfriended, new-adopted to ourhate,
dowered with our curse, andstrangered with our oath,
take her or leave her?
Pardon me, royal sir.
Election makes not up in suchconditions.
Then leave her, sir, for, by thepower that made me,
I tell you all her wealth.
For you, great king,
I would not from your love makesuch a stray
to match you where I hate.
Therefore beseech you
to avert your liking a moreworthier way
than on a wretch whom nature isashamed
almost to acknowledge hers.
This is most strange,
that she, whom even but now wasyour best object,
the argument of your praise,balm of your age,
the best, the dearest,
should in this trice of timecommit a thing so monstrous
to dismantle so many folds offavor.
Sure, her offense must be ofsuch unnatural degree
that monsters it,
or your fore-vouched affectionfall into taintó
which, to believe of her, mustbe a faith
that reason without miracleshould never plant in me.
I yet beseech Your Majesty.
If for I want that glib and oilyart,
to speak and purpose notó
since what I well intend, I'lldo it before I speakó
that you make known
it is no vicious blot, murder,or foulness,
no unchaste action or dishonoredstep
that hath deprived me of yourgrace and favor.
But even for want of that forwhich I am richer,
a still-soliciting eye
and such a tongue that I am gladI have not,
though not to have it hath lostme in your liking.
Better thou hadst not been born
than not to have pleased mebetter.
Is it but this, a tardiness innature,
that often leaves the historyunspoke
which it intends to do?
My lord of Burgundy, what sayyou to the lady?
Love's not love when 'tismingled with regards
that stand aloof from the entirepoint.
Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.
Royal Majesty,
give but that portion whichyourself proposed,
and here I take Cordelia by thehand,
Duchess of Burgundy.
Nothing.
I have sworn. I am firm.
I am sorry, then, you have solost a father
that you must lose a husband.
Peace be with Burgundy.
Since that respects of fortuneare his love,
I shall not be his wife.
Fairest Cordelia, that art mostrich, being poor;
most choice, forsaken; and mostloved, despised.
Thee and thy virtues here, Iseize upon.
Be it lawful, I take up what'scast away.
Gods, gods.
'Tis strange that from theircold'st neglect,
my love should kindle toinflamed respect.
Thy dowerless daughter, King,thrown to my chance,
is queen of us, of ours, of ourfair France.
Not all the dukes of waterishBurgundy
can buy this unprized preciousmaid of me.
Bid them farewell, Cordelia,though unkind.
Thou losest here a better whereto find.
Thou hast her, France.
Let her be thine, for we have nosuch daughter,
nor shall ever see that face ofhers again.
Therefore, be gone
without our grace, our love, ourbenison.
Come, noble Burgundy.
Bid farewell to your sisters.
The jewels of our father,
with washed eyes, Cordelialeaves you.
I know you what you are
and, like a sister, am mostloath
to call your faults as they arenamed.
Love well our father.
To your professed bosoms, Icommit him.
But yet, alas, stood I withinhis grace,
I would prefer him to a betterplace.
So farewell to you both.
Prescribe not us our duties.
Let your study be to contentyour lord,
who hath received you atfortune's alms.
You have obedience scanted
and well are worth the want thatyou have wanted.
Time shall unfold what plaitedcunning hides
who covers faults at last withshame derides.
Well may you prosper.
Come, my fair Cordelia.
Sister, it is not little I haveto say
of what most nearly appertainsto us both.
I think our father will hencetonight.
That is most certain, and withyou.
Next month, with us.
You see how full of changes hisage is.
The observation we have made onit hath not been little.
He always loved our sister best,
and with what poor judgment hehath now cast her off
appears too grossly.
'Tis the infirmity of his age.
Yet he hath ever but slenderlyknown himself.
The best and soundest of histime hath been but rash.
Then must we look from his age
to receive not alone theimperfections
of long-engraffed condition
but therewithal the unrulywaywardness
that infirm and choleric yearsbring with them.
Such unconstant starts are welikely to have of him
as this of Kent's banishment.
There is further compliment ofleave-taking
between France and him.
Pray you, let's hit together.
If our father carry authority
with such dispositions as hebears,
this last surrender of his willbut offend us.
We shall further think on it.
We must do something and in theheat.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess.
To thy law my services arebound.
Wherefore should I stand in theplague of custom
and permit the curiosity ofnations to deprive me,
for that I am some 12 or 14moon-shines
lag of a brother?
Why bastard?
Wherefore base
when my dimensions are as wellcompact,
my mind as generous, and myshape as true
as honest madam's issue?
Why brand they us with base,
with baseness, bastardy, base,base?
Who, in the lusty stealth ofnature,
take more composition and fiercequality than doth,
within a dull, stale, tired bed,
go to the creating a whole tribeof fops
got 'tween asleep and wake?
Well, then, legitimate Edgar, Imust have your land.
Our father's love
is to the bastard Edmund as tothe legitimate.
Fine word, "legitimate."
Well, my legitimate, if thisletter speed
and my invention thrive,
Edmund the base shall top thelegitimate.
I grow; I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up forbastards.
Kent banished thus.
And France in choler parted.
And the king gone tonight.
Subscribed his power. Confinedto exhibition.
All this done upon the gad.
Edmund, how now?
What news?
So please Your Lordship, none.
Why so earnestly seek you to putup that letter?
I know no news, my lord.
What paper were you reading?
Nothing, my lord.
No?
What needed, then,
that terrible dispatch of itinto your pocket?
The quality of nothing hath notsuch need to hide itself.
Let's see.
Come, if it be nothing, I shallnot need spectacles.
I beseech you, sir, pardon me.
It is a letter from my brotherthat I have not all o'er-read.
And for so much as I haveperused,
I find it not fit for youro'er-looking.
Give me the letter, sir.
I shall offend either to detainor give it.
The contents, as in part Iunderstand them,
are to blame.
Let's see. Let's see.
I hope, for my brother'sjustification,
he hath writ this
but as an essay or taste of myvirtue.
"This policy and reverence ofage
"makes the world bitter to thebest of our times,
"keeps our futures from us
"till our oldness cannot relishthem.
"I begin to find an idle andfond bondage
"in the oppression of agedtyranny,
"who sways, not as it hathpower,
"but as it is suffered.
"Come to me, that of this I mayspeak more.
"If our father should sleep tillI waked him,
"you should enjoy half hisrevenue forever
and live the beloved of yourbrother, Edgar."
Conspiracy?
"...sleep till I waked him,
"you should enjoy half hisrevenue"?
My son Edgar?
Had he a hand to write this,
a heart and brain to breed itin?
When came this to you?
Who brought it?
It was not brought me, my lord.
There's the cunning of it.
I found it thrown in at thecasement of my closet.
You know the character to beyour brother's?
If the matter were good, mylord,
I durst swear it were his.
But in respect of that, I wouldfain think it were not.
It is his.
It is his hand, my lord.
But I hope his heart is not inthe contents.
Has he never before sounded youin this business?
Never, my lord.
But I have heard him oftmaintain it to be fit
that sons at perfect age andfathers declined,
the father should be as ward tothe son
and the son manage his revenue.
O villain, villain!
His very opinion in the letter!
Abhorred villain!
Unnatural, detested, brutishvillain!
Worse than brutish!
Go, sirrah, seek him.
I'll apprehend him.
Abominable villain!
Where is he?
I do not well know, my lord.
If it shall please you tosuspend your indignation
against my brother
till you can derive bettertestimony of his intent,
you shall run a certain courseó
where, if you violently proceedagainst him,
mistaking his purpose,
it would make a great gap inyour own honor
and shake in pieces the heart ofhis obedience.
I dare pawn down my life forhim,
that he hath wrote this to feelmy affection to your honor
and to no other pretense ofdanger.
Think you so?
If your honor judge it meet, Iwill place you
where you shall hear us conferof this
and, by an auricular assurance,have your satisfaction,
and that with no greater delaythan this very evening.
He cannot be such a monster.
Nor is not, sure.
To his father, who so tenderlyand entirely loves him.
Heaven and Earth!
Seek him out, Edmund.
Wind me into him, I pray you.
Frame the business after yourown wisdom.
I would unstate myself to be ina due resolution.
I will seek him, sir, presently,
convey the business as I shallfind means,
and acquaint you withal.
These late eclipses in the Sunand moon portend no good to us.
Though the wisdom of nature canreason it thus and thus,
yet nature finds itself scourgedby the sequent effects.
Love cools, friendship fallsoff,
brothers divide.
In cities, mutinies; incountries, discord;
in palaces, treason.
And the bond cracked 'twixt sonand father.
This villain of mine comes underthe prediction;
there's son against father.
The king falls from bias ofnature;
there's father against child.
Oh.
We have seen the best of ourtime.
Machinations, hollowness,treachery,
and all ruinous disorders
follow us disquietly to ourgraves.
Find out this villain, Edmund.
It shall lose thee nothing.
Do it carefully.
And the noble and true-heartedKent banished.
His offense: honesty.
'Tis strange.
This is the excellent foppery ofthe world:
that when we are sick in fortune
often the surfeits of our ownbehavioró
we make guilty of our disasters
the Sun, the moon, and stars
as if we were villains onnecessity;
fools by heavenly compulsion;
knaves, thieves, and treachers,by spherical predominance;
drunkards, liars, and adulterers
by an enforced obedience ofplanetary influence;
and all that we are evil in by adivine thrusting on.
An admirable evasion ofwhoremaster man,
to lay his goatish dispositionon the charge of a star.
My father compounded with mymother
under the dragon's tail,
and my nativity was under Ursamajor,
so that it follows I am roughand lecherous.
I should have been that I am,
had the maidenliest star in thefirmament twinkled
on my bastardizing.
Edgar
Pat he comes like thecatastrophe of the old comedy.
My cue is villainous melancholy,
with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
O, these eclipses do portendthese divisions.
How now, brother Edmund?
What serious contemplation areyou in?
I am thinking, brother,
of a prediction I read thisother day
what should follow theseeclipses.
Do you busy yourself with that?
I promise you, the effects hewrites of succeed unhappily,
as of unnaturalness between thechild and the parent;
death, dearth, dissolutions ofancient amities;
divisions in state;
menaces and maledictions againstking and nobles;
needless diffidences; banishmentof friends;
dissipation of cohorts; nuptialbreaches;
and I know not what.
How long have you been a sectaryastronomical?
Come, come.
When saw you my father last?
The night gone by.
Spake you with him?
Ay, two hours together.
Parted you in good terms?
Found you no displeasure in himby word nor countenance?
None at all.
Bethink yourself wherein you mayhave offended him.
And at my entreaty, forbear hispresence
until some little time hathqualified the heat
of his displeasure,
which, at this instant, sorageth in him
that with the mischief of yourperson,
it would scarcely allay.
Some villain hath done me wrong.
That's my fear.
I pray you, have a continentforbearance
till the speed of his rage goesslower.
And, as I say, retire with me tomy lodging,
from whence I will fitly bringyou to hear my lord speak.
Pray ye, go.
There's my key.
If you do stir abroad, go armed.
Armed, brother?
Brother, I advise you to thebest.
I am no honest man if there beany good meaning toward you.
I have told you what I have seenand heard,
but faintly nothing like theimage and horror of it.
Pray you, away.
Shall I hear from you anon?
I do serve you in this business.
A credulous father and a brothernoble,
whose nature is so far fromdoing harms
that he suspects none,
on whose foolish honesty mypractices ride easy.
I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, havelands by wit.
All with me's meet that I canfashion fit.
Did my father strike mygentleman
for chiding of his fool?
Aye, madam.
By day and night, he wrongs me.
Every hour, he flashes into onegross crime or other
that sets us all at odds.
I'll not endure it.
His knights grow riotous,
and himself upbraids us on everytrifle.
When he returns from hunting, Iwill not speak with him.
Say I am sick.
If you come slack of formerservices,
you shall do well.
The fault of it, I'll answer.
He's coming, madam; I hear him.
Put on what weary negligence youplease,
you and your fellows.
I'll have it come to question.
If he distaste it, let him to mysister,
whose mind and mine, I know, inthat are one,
not to be over-ruled.
Idle old man that still wouldmanage
those authorities that he hathgiven away.
Now, by my life, old fools arebabes again
and must be used with checks asflatteries
when they are seen abused.
Remember what I have said.
Well, madam.
And let his knights have colderlooks among you.
What grows of it, no matter.
Advise your fellows so.
I would breed from henceoccasions,
and I shall, that I may speak.
I'll write straight to my sister
to hold my very course.
Prepare for dinner.
If but as well I other accentsborrow
that can my speech defuse,
my good intent may carry throughitself
to that full issue for which Irazed my likeness.
Now, banished Kent,
if thou canst serve where thoudost stand condemned,
so may it come thy master, whomthou lovest,
shall find thee full of labors.
Let me not stay a jot fordinner.
Go, get it ready.
How now?
What art thou?
A man, sir.
What dost thou profess?
What wouldst thou with us?
I do profess to be no less thanI seem,
to serve him truly that will putme in trust,
to love him that is honest,
to converse with him that iswise and says little,
to fear judgment, to fight whenI cannot choose,
and to eat no fish.
What art thou?
A very honest-hearted fellow andas poor as the king.
If thou be as poor for a subjectas he is for a king,
thou art poor enough.
What wouldst thou?
Service.
Who wouldst thou serve?
You.
Dost thou know me, fellow?
No, sir; but you have that inyour countenance
that I would fain call master.
What's that?
Authority.
What services canst thou do?
I can keep honest counsel, ride,run,
mar a curious tale in tellingit,
and deliver a plain messagebluntly.
That which ordinary men are fitfor, I am qualified in.
And the best of me is diligence.
How old art thou?
Not so young, sir, to love awoman for singing,
nor so old to dote on her foranything.
I have years on my back 48.
Follow me; thou shalt serve me.
If I like thee no worse afterdinner,
I shall not part from theebefore.
Dinner, ho, dinner!
Where's my knave, my fool?
Go you, and call my fool hither.
You, you, sirrah, where's mydaughter?
So please you
What says the fellow there?
Call the clodpoll back!
Where's my fool, ho-ho-ho?
I think the world's asleep.
How now!
Where's that mongrel?
He says, my lord, your daughteris not well.
Why came not the slave back tome when I called him?
Sir, he answered me in theroundest manner
he would not.
He would not?
My lord, I know not what thematter is.
But to my judgment, yourhighness
is not entertained with thatceremonious affection
as you were wont.
There's a great abatement ofkindness appears as well
in the general dependents
as in the duke himself also andyour daughter.
Ha! Sayest thou so?
I beseech you, pardon me, mylord, if I be mistaken,
for my duty cannot be silent
when I think your highnesswronged.
Thou but rememberest me of mineown conception.
I have perceived a most faintneglect of late,
which I have rather blamed asmine own jealous curiosity
than as the very pretense andpurpose of unkindness.
I will look further into it.
But where's my fool?
I have not seen him this twodays.
Since my young lady's going intoFrance, sir,
the fool hath much pined away.
No more of that; I have noted itwell.
Go you; tell my daughter I wouldspeak with her.
Go you, and call hither my fool!
O, you sir, you!
Come you hither, sir.
Who am I, sir?
My lady's father.
"My lady's father."
My lord's knave.
You whoreson dog, you slave, youcur.
I am none of these, my lord; Ibeseech your pardon.
Do you bandy looks with me, yourascal?
I'll not be strucken, my lord.
Nor tripped neither, you basefootball player.
I thank thee, fellow.
Thou servest me, and I'll lovethee.
Come, sir. Arise, away.
No, we'll teach you differences.
Away, away.
Have you wisdom?
If you will measure yourlubber's length again, tarry.
But away.
Go to.
Now, my friendly knave, I thankthee.
Here's earnest for thy service.
Let me hire him too: here's mycoxcomb.
How now, my pretty knave?
How dost thou?
Sirrah, you were best take mycoxcomb.
Why, fool?
Why? For taking one's part thatout of favor.
Nay, and thou canst not smile asthe wind sits;
thou'lt catch cold shortly.
Here, take my coxcomb.
Why, this fellow, he hasbanished two on's daughters
and did the third a blessingagainst his will.
If thou follow him, thou mustneeds wear my coxcomb.
How now, nuncle!
Would I had two coxcombs and twodaughters!
Why, boy?
If I gave them all me living,I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
There's mine; beg another of thydaughters.
Take heed, sirrah; the whip.
Truth's a dog must to kennel.
He must be whipped out when Ladythe brach
may stand by the fire and stink.
A pestilent gall to me.
Sirrah, I'll teach thee aspeech.
Do, boy.
Mark it, nuncle.
Have more than thou showest,speak less than thou knowest,
lend less than thou owest, ridemore than thou goest,
learn more than thou trowest,set less than thou throwest;
leave thy drink and thy whore,and keep in-a-door,
and thou shalt have more thantwo tens to a score.
This is nothing, fool.
Then 'tis like the breath of anunfee'd lawyer;
you gave me nothing for it.
Can you make no use of nothing,nuncle?
Why, no, boy; nothing can bemade out of nothing.
Prithee, tell him.
So much the rent of his landcomes to.
He'll not believe a fool.
A bitter fool.
Dost know the difference, myboy,
between a bitter fool and asweet one?
No, lad; teach me.
That lord that counseled thee togive away thy land,
come place him here by me, anddo thou for him stand.
The sweet and bitter fool willpresently appear
the one in motley here, theother found out there.
Dost thou call me fool, boy?
All thy other titles thou hastgiven away
that thou wast born with.
This is not altogether fool, mylord.
No, faith, lords and great menwill not let me.
If I had a monopoly out, they'dhave part on it.
And the ladies too, they'll notlet me have all the fool tomyself;
they'd be snatching.
-Nuncle. -Huh?
Give me an egg, and I'll givethee two crowns.
What two crowns shall they be?
Why, when I've cut the egg inthe middle
and eat up the meat, the twocrowns of the egg.
When thou clovest thy crown inthe middle
and gavest away both parts,
thou borest thy ass on thy backo'er the dirt.
Thou hadst little wit in thybald crown
when thou gavest thy golden oneaway.
If I speak like meself in this,
let him be whipped that firstfinds it so.
Fools have ne'er less grace in ayear.
For wise men are grown foppish
and know not how their wits towear.
Their manners are so apish.
When wast thou wont to be sofull of song, sirrah?
I have used it, nuncle,
ever since thou mad'st thydaughters thy mothers.
For when thou gavest them therod
and putest down thine ownbreeches,
then they for sudden joy didweep
and I for sorrow sung
that such a king should playbo-peep
and go the fools among.
O nuncle, prithee, keep aschoolmaster
that could teach thy fool tolie.
I'd fain learn to lie.
And you lie, sirrah, we'll haveyou whipped.
I marvel what kin thou and thydaughters are.
They'd have me whipped forspeaking true;
thou'st have me whipped forlying;
sometimes I'm whipped forholding me peace.
I'd rather be any kind of thingthan a fool.
And yet I would not be thee,nuncle.
Thou hast pared thy wit on bothsides
and left nothing in the middle.
Here comes one of the parings.
How now, daughter?
What makes that frontlet on?
You're too much of late in thefrown.
Thou wast a pretty fellow
when thou hadst no need to carefor her frowning.
Now thou art an O without afigure.
I am better than thou art now.
I am a fool; thou art nothing.
Yes, forsooth, I will hold mepeace.
So your face bids me, though yousay nothing.
Mum, mum, mum.
He that keeps no crust norcrumb,
weary of all, shall want some.
That's a shealed peasecod.
Not only, sir, this yourall-licensed fool,
but other of your insolentretinue
do hourly carp and quarrel,
breaking forth in rank andnot-to-be endured riots.
Sir, I had thought, by makingthis well known to you,
to have found a safe redress butnow grow fearful
by what yourself too late havespoke and done
that you protect their courseand put it on by your allowance,
which, if you should,
the fault would not 'scapecensure,
nor the redresses sleep,
which, in the tender of awholesome weal,
might in their working do youthat offense,
which else were shame that theirnecessity
will call discreet proceeding.
For, you trow, nuncle,
the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckooso long,
it had its head bit off by itsyoung!
So out went the candle, and wewere left darkling.
Are you our daughter?
I would you would make use ofyour good wisdom,
whereof I know you are fraught,
and put away these dispositions
which of late transport you fromwhat you rightly are.
May not the ass know when thecart draws the horse?
Oh, whoops, Jug.
I love thee.
Does any here know me?
This is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus, speak thus?
Where are his eyes?
Either his notion weakens
or his discernings arelethargied.
Waking? 'Tis not so.
Who is it that will tell me whoI am?
Lear's shadow.
I would learn that, for by themarks
of sovereignty, knowledge, andreason,
I should be false persuaded Ihad daughters.
Which they will make an obedientfather.
Your name, fair gentlewoman?
This admiration, sir,
is much o' the savor of otheryour new pranks.
I do beseech you to understandmy purposes aright.
As you are old and reverend,should be wise.
Here you do keep a hundredknights and squiresó
men so disordered, so deboshedand bold
that this our court, infectedwith their manners,
shows like a riotous inn.
Epicurism and lust makes it morelike a brothel or a tavern
than a graced palace.
The shame itself doth speak forinstant remedy.
Be then desired by her
that else will take the thingshe begs:
a little to disquantity yourtrain
and the remainder that shallstill depend
to be such men as may besortyour age,
which know themselves and you.
Darkness and devils!
Saddle my horses! Call my traintogether!
Degenerate bastard!
I'll not trouble thee.
Yet have I left a daughter.
You strike my people,
and your disordered rabble makeservants of their betters.
Woe, that too late repentsó
O, sir, are you come?
Is it your will?
Speak, sir.
Prepare my horses.
Ingratitude, thou marble-heartedfiend,
more hideous when thou show'stthee in a child
than the sea-monster.
Pray, sir, be patient.
Detested kite!
Thou liest.
My train are men of choice andrarest parts
who all particulars of dutyknow,
and, with the most exact regard,
support the worships of theirname.
O most small fault,
how ugly didst thou in Cordeliashow
which, like an engine,
wrenched my frame of nature fromthe fixed place,
drew from my heart all love, andadded to the gall.
O Lear, Lear, Lear.
Beat at this gate
that let thy folly in and thydear judgment out!
Go, go, my people.
My lord, I am as guiltless as Iam ignorant
of what hath moved you.
It may be so, my lord.
Hear, Nature, hear.
Dear goddess, hear.
Suspend thy purpose if thoudidst intend
to make this creature fruitful.
Into her womb, convey sterility.
Dry up in her the organs ofincrease.
And from her derogate body
never spring a babe to honorher.
If she must teem, create herchild of spleen
that it may live
and be a thwart disnaturedtorment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in herbrow of youth,
with cadent tears fret channelsin her cheeks,
turn all her mother's pains andbenefits
to laughter and contempt
that she may feel how sharperthan a serpent's tooth it is
to have a thankless child.
Away, away!
Now, gods that we adore,wherefore comes this?
Never afflict yourself to knowmore of it,
but let his disposition havethat scope
as dotage gives it.
What, fifty of my followers at aclap within a fortnight?
What's the matter, sir?
I'll tell thee: life and death!
I am ashamed that thou hastpower
to shake my manhood thus,
that these hot tears, whichbreak from me perforce,
should make thee worth them.
Blasts and fogs upon thee!
The untented woundings of afather's curse
pierce every sense about thee.
Old fond eyes, beweep this causeagain,
I'll pluck ye out and cast you,
with the waters that you loose,to temper clay.
It is come to this?
Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
who, I am sure, is kind andcomfortable.
When she shall hear this ofthee,
with her nails, she'll flay thywolvish visage.
Thou shalt find that I'll resumethat shape
which thou dost think I havecast off forever.
Do you mark that, my lord?
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,to the great love I bear you
Pray you, content.
What, Oswald, ho!
You, sir, more knave than fool,after your master.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear,
tarry, take the fool with thee!
The fox, when one has caughther,
and such a daughter should sureto the slaughter
if my cap would buy a halter!
And so the fool follows after!
This man hath had good counsel:a hundred knights.
'Tis politic and safe
to let him keep at point ahundred knightsó
yes, that, on every dream, eachbuzz, each fancy,
each complaint, dislike,
he may enguard his dotage intheir powers
and hold our lives in mercy?
Oswald, I say!
Well, you may fear too far.
Safer than trust too far.
Let me still take away the harmsI fear,
not fear still to be taken.
I know his heart.
What he hath uttered I have writmy sister.
If she sustain him and hishundred knights
when I have showed theunfitnessó
how now, Oswald?
What, have you writ that letterto my sister?
Aye, madam.
Take you some company, and awayto horse.
Inform her full of my particularfear.
And thereto add such reasons asyour own
as may compact it more.
Get you gone, and hasten yourreturn.
No, no, my lord,
this milky gentleness and courseof yours,
though I condemn not, yet, underpardon,
you are much more attasked forwant of wisdom
than praised for harmfulmildness.
How far your eyes may pierce, Icannot tell.
Striving to be better, oft wemar what's well.
Nay, then.
Oh, well, the event.
Go you before to Gloucester withthese letters.
Acquaint my daughter no furtherwith anything you know
than comes from her demand outof the letter.
If your diligence be not speedy,I shall be there before you.
I will not sleep, my lord, tillI have delivered your letter.
If a man's brains were in hisheels,
were't not in danger of kibes?
Ay, boy.
Then, I prithee, be merry; thywit shall not go slip-shod.
Ha, ha, ha.
Shalt see thy other daughterwill use thee kindly,
for though she's as like this asa crab's like an apple,
yet I can tell what I can tell.
What canst tell, boy?
She will taste as like this as acrab does to a crab.
Canst tell why one's nose stands
in the middle on's face?
No.
To keep his eyes on either sideof his nose,
that what a man cannot smellout,
he may spy into.
I did her wrong.
Canst tell how an oyster makeshis shell?
No!
No, nor I neither!
But I can tell why a snail has ahouse.
Why?
To put his head in,
not to give it away to hisdaughters
and leave his horns without acase.
I shall forget my nature.
So kind a father.
Be my horses ready?
Thy asses are gone about 'em.
The reason why the seven starsare no more than seven
is a pretty reason.
Because they're not eight?
Yes, indeed.
Thou would make a good fool.
To take 't again perforce.
Monster ingratitude.
If thou wert my fool, nuncle,
I'ld have thee beaten for beingold before thy time.
How's that?
Thou shouldst not have been oldtill thou hadst been wise.
O, let me not be mad, not mad.
Sweet heaven, keep me in temper.
I would not be mad.
How now! Are my horses ready?
Ready, my lord.
Come, boy.
She that's a maid now and laughsat my departure
shall not be a maid long unlessthings be cut shorter.
Save thee, Curan.
And you, sir.
Oh, I've been with your father
and given him notice that theDuke of Cornwall
and Regan, his duchess,
will be here with him thisnight.
How comes that?
Nay, I know not.
You have heard of the newsabroad.
Not I. Pray you, what are they?
Have you heard of no likely warstoward
'twixt Dukes of Cornwall andAlbany?
Not a word.
You may do, then, in time.
Fare you well, sir.
The duke be here tonight?
The better.
Best.
This weaves itself perforce intomy business.
My father hath set guard to takemy brother,
and I have one thing, of aqueasy question,
which I must act.
Briefness and fortune, work.
Brother, a word. Descend.
Brother, I say! Come.
My father watches.
O sir, fly this place.
Intelligence is given where youare hid.
You have now the good advantageof the night.
Have you not spoken 'gainst theDuke of Cornwall?
He's coming hither now, i' thenight, i' the haste,
and Regan with him.
Have you nothing said upon hisparty
'gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.
I am sure on't, not a word.
I hear my father coming. Pardonme.
In cunning, I must draw my swordupon you.
Draw; seem to defend yourself.
Now quit you well.
Ha! Yield!
Come before my father!
Light, ho, here!
Fly, brother.
Torches, torches!
So farewell.
Some blood drawn on me wouldbeget opinion
of my more fierce endeavor.
I have seen drunkards do morethan this in sport.
Father, father!
Stop, stop!
What, no help?
Now, Edmund, where's thevillain?
Here stood he in the dark, hissharp sword out,
mumbling of wicked charms,
conjuring the moon to standauspicious mistress.
But where is he?
Look, sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Fled this way, sir.
When by no means he couldó
Pursue him, ho! Go after.
By no means what?
Persuade me to the murder ofYour Lordship.
O strong and fastened villain.
Would he deny his letter?
I never got him.
Hark, the duke's trumpet.
I know not why he comes.
All ports I'll bar.
The villain shall not 'scape.
The duke must grant me that.
And of my land, loyal andnatural boy,
I'll work the means to make theecapable.
How now, my noble friend?
Since I came hither, which I cancall but now,
I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeancecomes too short
which can pursue the offender.
How dost, my lord?
O, madam, my old heart iscracked; it's cracked.
What, did my father's godsonseek your life?
He whom my father named? YourEdgar?
Lady, lady, shame would have ithid.
Was he not companion with theriotous knights
that tend upon my father?
I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad,too bad.
Yes, madam, he was of thatconsort.
No marvel, then, though he wereill affected.
'Tis they have put him onto theold man's death
to have the expense and waste ofhis revenue.
I have this present evening frommy sister
been well informed of them, andwith such cautions
that if they come to sojourn atmy house,
I'll not be there.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you haveshown your father
a child-like office.
It was my duty, sir.
He did bewray his practice andreceived this hurt you see
striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
Ay, my good lord.
If he be taken,
he shall never more be feared ofdoing harm.
Make your own purpose, how in mystrength you please.
For you, Edmund, whose virtueand obedience
doth this instant so muchcommend itself,
you shall be ours.
Natures of such deep trust shallwe much need.
You, we first seize on.
I shall serve you, sir, truly,however else.
For him, I thank Your Grace.
You know not why we came tovisit you.
Thus out of season, threadingdark-eyed night.
Occasions, noble Gloucester, ofsome poise,
wherein we must have use of youradvice.
Our father, he hath writ, sohath our sister,
of differences, which I bestthought it fit
to answer from home.
The several messengers fromhence attend dispatch.
Our good old friend, laycomforts to your bosom,
and bestow your needful counselto our businesses,
which craves the instant use.
I serve you, madam.
Your graces are right welcome.
Good dawning to thee, friend.
Art of this house?
Ay.
Where may we set our horses?
I' the mire.
Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tellme.
I love thee not.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsburypinfold,
I'd make thee care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus?
I know thee not.
O fellow, I know thee.
What dost thou know me for?
A knave; a rascal; an eater ofbroken meats;
a base, proud, shallow,beggarly, three-suited,
hundred-pound, filthy,worsted-stocking knave;
a lily-livered, action-taking,
whoreson, glass-gazing,super-serviceable finical rogue;
a one-trunk-inheriting slave;
one that wouldst be a bawd inway of good service
and art nothing but thecomposition
of knave, coward, beggar,pander,
and the son and heir of amongrel bitch;
and one whom I will beat intoclamorous whining
if thou deniest the leastsyllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous fellow artthou thus to rail upon one
that is neither known of theenor knows thee.
What a brazen-faced varlet artthou
to deny thou knowest me.
Is it not two days since Itripped up thy heels
and beat thee before the king?
Draw, you rogue,
for though it be night, yet themoon shines.
I'll make a sop o' the moonshineof you,
you whoreson cullionlybarber-monger.
Draw!
Away!
I'll have nothing to do withthee.
Draw, you rascal!
You come with letters againstthe king
and take vanity the puppet'spart
against the royalty of herfather, hmm?
Draw, you rascal, or I'll socarbonado your shanks.
Draw, you rogue! Come your ways!
Help, ho!
Murder! Help!
Strike, slave!
Stand, you rogue! Stand, youneat slave!
Help, ho!
Murder! Murder!
With you, goodman boy, if youplease.
I'll flesh ye. Come on, youngmaster.
What's the matter here?
Keep peace, upon your lives.
He dies that strikes again.
What's the matter?
The messengers from our sisterand the king.
What's your difference? Speak.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
No marvel, you have so bestirredyour valor.
You cowardly rascal, naturedisclaims in thee.
A tailor made thee.
Thou art a strange fellow.
A tailor make a man?
Ay, a tailor, sir.
A stone-cutter or a paintercould not have made him so ill,
though he had been but two hoursat the trade.
Speak yet. How grew yourquarrel?
This ancient ruffian, sir,
whose life I have spared at suitof his gray beardó
Thou whoreson zed!
Thou unnecessary letter!
My lord, if you'll give meleave,
I'll tread this unbolted villaininto mortar
and daub the wall of a jakeswith him.
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you noreverence?
Yes, sir, but anger hath aprivilege.
Why art thou angry?
That such a slave as this shouldwear a sword
who wears no honesty.
Such smiling rogues as theserenege, affirm,
and turn their halcyon beaks
with every gale and vary oftheir master,
knowing naught, like dogs, butfollowing.
A plague upon your epilepticvisage!
Smile you my speeches as I werea fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarumplain,
I'ld drive ye cackling home toCamelot.
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
How fell you out? Say that.
No contraries hold moreantipathy
than I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him knave?
What is his fault?
His countenance likes me not.
No more, perchance, does mine,nor his, nor hers.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to beplain.
I have seen better faces in mytime
than stands on any shoulder thatI see before me
at this instant.
This is some fellow who,
having been praised forbluntness,
doth affect a saucy roughness
and constrains the garb quitefrom his nature.
He cannot flatter, he.
An honest mind and plain, hemust speak truth.
An' they will take it, so; ifnot, he's plain.
These kind of knaves I know,which in this plainness
harbor more craft and morecorrupter ends
than 20 silly ducking observants
that stretch their dutiesnicely.
Oh, sir, in good faith, insincere verity,
under the allowance of yourgreat aspect,
whose influence,
like the wreath of radiant fireon flickering Phoebus' frontó
What mean'st by this?
To go out of my dialect, whichyou discommend so much.
I know, sir, I am no flatterer.
He that beguiled you in a plainaccent
was a plain knave, which, for mypart, I will not be,
though I should win yourdispleasure
to entreat me to it.
What was the offense you gavehim?
I never gave him any.
It pleased the king, his master,very late to strike at me,
upon his misconstruction, whenhe,
compact and flattering hisdispleasure,
tripped me behind being down,insulted, railed,
and put upon him such a deal ofman
as worthied him, got praises ofthe king
for him attempting who wasself-subdued,
and, in the fleshment of thisdread exploit,
drew on me here again.
None of these rogues and cowardsbut Ajax is their fool.
Fetch forth the stocks.
You stubborn ancient knave, youreverend braggart,
we'll teach you.
Sir, I'm too old to learn.
Call not your stocks for me.
I serve the king,
on whose employment I was sentto you.
You shall do small respect, showtoo bold malice
against the grace and person ofmy master,
stocking his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks.
As I have life and honor, thereshall he sit till noon.
Till noon?
Till night, my lord, and allnight too.
Why, madam, if I were yourfather's dog,
you should not use me so.
Sir, being his knave, I will.
This is a fellow of theself-same color
our sister speaks of.
Come, bring away the stocks.
Let me beseech Your Grace not todo so.
His fault is much, and the goodking his master
will check him for 't.
Your purposed low correction
is such as basest andcontemned'st wretches
for pilferings and most commontrespasses
are punished with.
The king must take it ill
that he's so slightly valued inhis messenger
should have him thus restrained.
I'll answer that.
My sister may receive it muchmore worse
to have her gentleman abused,assaulted,
for following her affairs.
Put in his legs.
Come, my good lord, away.
I am sorry for thee, friend.
'Tis the duke's pleasure, whosedisposition,
all the world well knows, willnot be rubbed nor stopped.
I'll entreat for thee.
Pray, do not, sir.
I have watched and traveledhard.
Some time I shall sleep out; therest, I'll whistle.
A good man's fortune may growout at heels.
Give you good morrow.
The duke's to blame in this;'twill be ill taken.
Good king, that must approve thecommon saw,
thou out of heaven's benedictioncomest to the warm sun.
Approach, thou beacon to thisunder globe,
that by thy comfortable beams Imay peruse this letter.
Nothing almost sees miracles butmisery.
I know 'tis from Cordelia,
who hath most fortunately beeninformed
of my obscured course...
and shall find time from thisenormous state,
seeking to give losses theirremedies.
All weary and o'erwatched, takevantage, heavy eyes,
not to behold this shamefullodging.
Fortune, good night.
Smile once more.
Turn thy wheel.
I heard myself proclaimed
and, by the happy hollow of atree, escaped the hunt.
No port is free,
no place that guard and mostunusual vigilance
does not attend my taking.
Whiles I may 'scape, I willpreserve myself
and am bethought to take
the basest and most poorestshape
that ever penury, in contempt ofman,
brought near to beast.
My face, I'll grime with filth,
blanket my loins: elf all myhairs in knots,
and, with presented nakedness,
out-face the winds andpersecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof andprecedent of Bedlam beggars,
who, with roaring voices,
strike in their numbed andmortified bare arms
pins, wooden pricks, nails,sprigs of rosemary
and, with this horrible object,from low farms,
poor pelting villages,sheep-cotes, and mills,
sometime with lunatic bans,sometime with prayers,
enforce their charity.
Poor Turlygod.
Poor Tom.
That's something yet.
Edgar, I nothing am.
'Tis strange that they should sodepart from home
and not send back my messenger.
As I learned, the night before,
there was no purpose in them ofthis remove.
Hail to thee, noble master.
Ah!
Mak'st thou this shame thypastime?
No, my lord.
He wears cruel garters.
Horses are tied by the head,dogs and bears by the neck,
monkeys by the loins, and men bythe legs.
When a man's over-lusty at legs,he wears wooden nether-stocks.
What's he that has so much thyplace mistook
to set thee here?
It is both he and she; your sonand daughter.
- No. - Yes.
- No, I say. - I say yea.
No, no, they would not.
Yes, they have.
By Jupiter, I swear, no.
By Juno, I swear, aye.
They durst not do it.
They could not, would not do it.
'Tis worse than murder,
to do upon respect such violentoutrage.
Resolve me, with all modesthaste,
which way thou mightst deserve
or they employ this usage,coming from us.
My lord, when at their home,
I did commend your highness'letters to them.
'Ere I was risen from the placethat showed my duty kneeling,
came there a reeking post,stewed in his haste,
half breathless,
panting forth from Goneril, hismistress, salutations;
delivered letters, spite ofintermission,
which presently they read;
on whose contents, they summonedup their meiny,
straight took horse, commandedme to follow,
and attend the leisure of theiranswer,
gave me cold looks.
And meeting here the othermessenger,
whose welcome, I perceived, hadpoisoned mineó
being the very fellow which oflate displayed
so saucily against yourhighnessó
having more man than wit aboutme, drew.
He raised the house with loudand coward cries.
Your son and daughter found thistrespass
worth the shame which here itsuffers.
Winter's not gone yet if thewild geese fly that way.
Fathers that wear rags do maketheir children blind,
but fathers that bear bags shallsee their children kind.
Fortune, that arrant whore,
ne'er turns the key for thepoor.
But, for all this,
thou shalt have as many dolorsfor thy daughters
as thou canst tell in a year.
O, how this mother swells uptoward my heart.
Hysterica passio, down.
Thou climbing sorrow, thyelement's below.
Where is this daughter?
With the earl, sir, here within.
Follow me not. Stay here.
Made you no more offense butwhat you speak of?
None.
How chance the king comes withso small a number?
And thou hadst been set i' thestocks for that question,
thou hadst well deserved it.
Why, fool?
We'll set thee to school to anant
to teach thee there's nolaboring in the winter.
All that follow their noses areled by their eyes
but blind men.
And there's not a nose among 20
but can tell him that'sstinking.
Let go thy hold
when a great wheel runs down ahill,
lest it break thy neck withfollowing.
But the great one that goesupwards,
let him draw thee after.
When a wise man gives theebetter counsel,
give me mine again.
I'd have none but knaves followit,
since a fool gives it.
Where learned you this, fool?
Not i' the stocks, fool.
Deny to speak with me?
They are sick? They are weary?
They have traveled all thenight?
Mere fetches, the images ofrevolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
My dear lord, you know the fieryquality of the duke,
how unremovable and fixed he isin his own course.
Vengeance, plague, death,confusion.
Fiery? What quality?
Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
I would speak with the Duke ofCornwall and his wife.
Well, my good lord, I haveinformed them so.
Informed them?
Dost understand me, man?
Aye, my good lord.
The king would speak withCornwall.
The dear father would with hisdaughter speak,
commands their service.
Are they informed of this?
My breath and blood.
Fiery? The fiery duke?
Tell the hot duke tható
no, but not yet.
Maybe he is not well.
Infirmity doth still neglect alloffice
to which our health is bound.
We are not ourselves whennature, being oppressed,
commands the mind to suffer withthe body.
I'll forbear and am fallen outwith my more headier will
to take the indisposed andsickly fit
for the sound man.
Death on my state!
Wherefore should he sit here?
This act persuades me
that this remotion of the dukeand her is practice only.
Give me my servant forth!
Go tell the duke and 's wifeI'ld speak with them
now, presently.
Bid them come forth and hear me,or at their chamber-door,
I'll beat the drum till it crysleep to death.
I would have all well betwixtyou.
O me, my heart, my rising heart.
But down.
Cry to it, nuncle, as thecockney did to the eels
when she put 'em in the pastealive.
She knapped 'em o' the coxcombswith a stick
and cried, "Down, wantons,down!"
It was her brother that, in purekindness to his horse,
buttered his hay.
Good morrow to you both.
Hail to Your Grace.
I am glad to see Your Highness.
Regan, I think you are.
I know what reason I have tothink so.
If thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thymother's tomb,
sepulchering an adulteress.
O, are you free?
Some other time for that.
Beloved Regan, thy sister'snaught.
O Regan, she hath tiedsharp-toothed unkindness,
like a vulture, here.
I can scarce speak to thee.
Thou'dst not believe with howdepraved a quality
O Regan.
I pray you, sir, take patience.
I have hope you less know how tovalue her desert
than she to scant her duty.
Say, how is that?
I cannot think my sister in theleast
would fail in her obligation.
If, sir, perchance she haverestrained
the riots of your followers,
'tis on such ground and to suchwholesome end
that clears her from all blame.
My curses on her.
O, sir, you are old.
Nature in you stands on the veryverge of her confine.
You should be ruled and led bysome discretion
that discerns your state betterthan you yourself.
Therefore, I pray you,
that to my sister you do makereturn.
Say you have wronged her, sir.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomesthe house?
"Dear daughter, I confess that Iam old.
"Age is unnecessary.
"On my knees, I beg
that you'll vouchsafe meraiment, bed, and food."
Good sir, no more of theseunsightly tricks.
Return you to my sister.
Never, Regan.
She hath abated me of half mytrain;
looked black upon me; struck mewith her tongue,
most serpent-like, about thevery heart.
All the stored vengeances ofheaven fall
on her ingrateful top.
Strike her young bones, youtaking airs, with lameness.
Fie, sir, fie.
You nimble lightnings,
dart your blinding flames intoher scornful eyes.
Infect her beauty, youfen-sucked fogs,
drawn by the powerful sun, tofall and blast her pride.
O the blest gods!
So will you wish on me when therash mood is on.
Never, Regan.
Thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shallnot give thee o'er
to harshness.
Her eyes are fierce, but thinedo comfort and not burn.
'Tis not in thee to grudge mypleasures,
to cut off my train, to bandyhasty words,
to scant my sizes, and, inconclusion,
to oppose the bolt against mycoming in.
Thou better knowest the officesof nature,
bond of childhood, effects ofcourtesy,
dues of gratitude.
Thy half o' the kingdom hastthou not forgot,
wherein I thee endowed.
Good sir, to the purpose.
Who put my man in the stocks?
What trumpet's that?
I know it; 'tis my sister's.
This approves her letter; shewould soon be here.
Is your lady come?
This is a slave whoseeasy-borrowed pride dwells
in the fickle grace of her hefollows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!
What means Your Grace?
How came my man i' the stocks?
Regan, I have good hope thoudidst not know on't.
Who comes here?
O heavens, if you do love oldmen,
if your sweet sway allowobedience,
if you yourselves are old, makeit your cause.
Send down and take my part.
Art not ashamed to look uponthis beard?
O Regan, will you take her bythe hand?
Why not by the hand, sir?
How have I offended?
All's not offense
that indiscretion finds anddotage terms so.
O sides, you are too tough.
Will you yet hold?
How came my man i' the stocks?
I set him there, sir.
But his own disorders deservedmuch less advancement.
You.
Did you?
I pray you, father, being weak,seem so.
If, till the expiration of amonth,
you will return and sojourn withmy sister,
dismissing half your train, comethen to me.
I am now from home and out ofthat provision
which shall be needful for yourentertainment.
Return to her and 50 mendismissed?
No, rather I abjure all roofs
and choose to wage against theenmity of the air,
To be a comrade with the wolfand owl.
Necessity's sharp pinch.
Return with her?
Why, the hot-blooded France,
who dowerless took our youngestborn,
I could as well be brought toknee his throne
and, squire-like, pension beg tokeep base life afoot.
Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slaveand sumpter
to that detested groom.
At your choice, sir.
I prithee, daughter, do not makeme mad!
I'll no more trouble thee, mychild.
Farewell, we'll no more meet, nomore see one another.
And yet thou art my flesh, myblood, my daughter.
Or rather a disease that's in myflesh
which I must needs call mine.
Thou art a boil, a plague-sore,
an embossed carbuncle in mycorrupted blood.
But I'll not chide thee.
Let shame come when it will; Ido not call it.
I do not bid the thunder-bearershoot
nor tell tales of thee tohigh-judging Jove.
Mend when thou canst; be betterat thy leisure.
I can be patient.
I can stay with Regan, I and myhundred knights.
Not altogether so.
I looked not for you yet,
nor am provided for your fitwelcome.
Give ear, sir, to my sister,
for those that mingle reasonwith your passion
must be content to think youold, and soó
but she knows what she does.
Is this well spoken?
I dare avouch it, sir.
What, 50 followers?
Is it not well?
What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that bothcharge and danger
speak 'gainst so great a number?
How, in one house, should manypeople,
under two commands, hold amity?
'Tis hard, almost impossible.
Why might not you, my lord,receive attendance
from those that she callsservants or from mine?
Why not, my lord?
If then they chanced to slackye,
we could control them.
If you will come to me for now Ispy a danger
I do entreat you bring but fiveand twenty.
To no more will I give place ornotice.
I gave you all.
And in good time, you gave it.
Made you my guardians, mydepositaries,
But kept a reservation to befollowed
by such a number.
What, must I come to you withfive and twenty, Regan?
Said you so?
And speak't again, my lord.
No more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet dolook more favored
when others are more wicked.
Not being worst stands in somerank of praise.
I'll go with thee.
Thy fifty yet doth double fiveand twenty,
and thou art twice her love.
Hear me, my lord.
What need you five and twenty,ten, or five,
to follow in a house where twiceso many
have a command to tend you?
What need one?
O, reason not the need.
Our basest beggars are in thepoorest thing superfluous.
Allow not nature more thannature needs,
man's life is cheap as beast's.
Thou art a lady.
If only to go warm weregorgeous,
why, nature needs not what thougorgeous wear'st,
which scarcely keeps thee warm.
But for true need
heavens, give me that patience.
Patience, I need!
You see me here, you gods,
a poor old man as full of griefas age,
wretched in both.
If it be you that stirs thesedaughters' hearts
against their father,
fool me not so much to bear ittamely.
Touch me with noble anger, andlet not women's weapons,
water-drops, stain my man'scheeks.
No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on youboth
as all the world shall
I shall do such things
What they are, yet I know not,
but they shall be the terrors ofthe Earth.
You think I'll weep.
No, I'll not weep.
I have full cause for weeping,but this heart shall break
into a hundred thousand flaws orere I'll weep.
O fool, I shall go mad.
Let us withdraw.
'Twill be a storm.
This house is little.
The old man and his peoplecannot be well bestowed.
'Tis his own blame hath puthimself from rest
and must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, I'll receivehim gladly
but not one follower.
So am I purposed.
Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
Followed the old man forth.
He is returned.
The king is in high rage.
Whither is he going?
He calls to horse, but will Iknow not whither.
'Tis best to give him way; heleads himself.
Hear me, my lord.
Entreat him by no means to stay.
Alas, the night comes on,
and the high winds do sorelyruffle.
For many miles about, there'sscarce a bush.
O, sir, to willful men,
the injuries that theythemselves procure
must be their schoolmasters!
Shut up your doors.
He's tended by a desperatetrain,
and what they may incense himto,
being apt to have his earabused,
wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors, my lord;'tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well.
Come, out of the storm.
Who's there, besides foulweather?
One minded like the weather:most unquietly.
Where's the king?
Contending with the fretfulelements.
Bids the winds blow the Earthinto the sea
or swell the curled waters 'bovethe main,
that things might change orcease.
Sir, I do know you and dare,
upon the warrant of my note,commend a dear thing to you.
There is division, although asyet,
the face of it is covered withmutual cunning,
'twixt Albany and Cornwall.
But, true it is, from France,there comes a power
into this scattered kingdom
who already, wise in ournegligence,
have secret feet in some of ourbest ports
and are at point to show theiropen banner.
Now, sir, to you.
If, on my credit, you dare buildso far
to make your speed to Dover,
you shall find some that willthank you,
making just report
of how unnatural and bemaddingsorrow
the king hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood andbreeding
and, from some knowledge andassurance,
offer this office to you.
I will talk further with you.
No, do not.
For confirmation that I am muchmore than my out-wall,
open this purse, and take whatit contains.
If you should see Cordelia asfear not but you shall
show her this ring, and she willtell you
who that fellow is that yet youdo not know.
Fie on this storm.
I'll go seek the king.
Blow, winds, and crack yourcheeks!
Rage!
Blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes,spout till you have drenched
our steeples, drowned the cocks!
You sulfurous andthought-executing fires,
vaunt-couriers of oak-cleavingthunderbolts,
singe my white head!
And you, all-shaking thunder,
strike flat the thick rotundityo' the world!
Crack nature's molds, allgermens spill at once
that make ingrateful man!
Nuncle, court holy-water in adry house
is better than this rain-waterout o' door.
Good nuncle, in.
Ask thy daughters' blessing.
Here's a night pities neitherwise men nor fools.
Rumble thy bellyful!
Spit, fire! Spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire,are my daughters.
I tax not you, you elements,with unkindness.
I never gave you kingdom, calledyou children.
You owe me no subscription.
Then let fall your horriblepleasure.
Here I stand, your slave;
a poor, infirm, weak, anddespised old man.
And yet I call you servileministers
that will with two perniciousdaughters
join your high engenderedbattles
'gainst a head so old and whiteas this.
Oh.
'Tis foul.
He that has a house to put hishead in
has a good head-piece.
No.
I will be the pattern of allpatience.
I will say nothing.
Who's there?
Marry, here's grace and acod-piece.
That's a wise man and a fool.
Alas, sir, are you here?
Things that love night love notsuch nights as these.
The wrathful skies gallow thevery wanderers of the night
and make them keep their caves.
Since I was man, such sheets offire,
such bursts of horrid thunder,
such groans of roaring wind andrain,
I never remember to have heard.
Man's nature cannot carry theaffliction nor the fear.
Let the great gods
that keep this dreadful pothero'er our heads
find out their enemies now.
Tremble, thou wretch, that hathwithin thee
undivulged crimes, unwhipped ofjustice.
Hide thee, thou bloody hand.
Thou perjured, and thou simularman
of virtue that art incestuous.
Caitiff, to pieces shake,
that under covert and convenientseeming
hath practiced on man's life.
Close pent-up guilts, rive yourconcealing continents,
and cry these dreadful summonersgrace.
I am a man more sinned againstthan sinning!
Alack, bare-headed.
Gracious my lord, hard by hereis a hovel.
Some friendship will it lend you'gainst the tempest.
Repose you there while I to thishard houseó
more harder than the stoneswhereof 'tis raised,
which, even but now, demandingafter you,
denied me to come in
return and force their scantedcourtesy.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on, my boy.
How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself.
Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities isstrange
that can make vile thingsprecious.
Come, your hovel.
Poor fool and knave,
I have one part in my heartthat's sorry yet for thee.
He that hath and a little tinywitó
with a hey, ho, the wind and therainó
must make content with hisfortunes fit,
for the rain, it raineth everyday.
True, my good boy.
Come, bring us to your hovel.
This is a brave night to cool acourtesan.
I'll speak a prophecy ere I go.
When priests are more in wordthan matter,
when brewers mar their malt withwater,
when nobles are their tailors'tutors,
no heretics burned but wenches'suitors,
then shall the realm of Albioncome
to great confusion.
When every case in law is right,
no squire in debt nor no poorknight,
when slanders do not live intongues
nor cutpurses come not tothrongs,
when usurers tell their gold i'the field
and bawds and whores do churchesbuild,
then comes the time, who livesto see 't,
when going shall be used withfeet.
And this prophecy Merlin shallmake,
for I live before his time.
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like notthis unnatural dealing.
When I desire their leave that Imight pity him,
they took from me the use ofmine own house;
charged me, on pain of perpetualdispleasure,
neither to speak of him, entreatfor him,
or in any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural.
Go to; say you nothing.
There is division between thedukes
and a worse matter than that.
I have received a letter thisnight.
'Tis dangerous to be spoken.
I have locked the letter in mycloset.
These injuries the king nowbears
will be revenged home.
There is part of a power alreadyfooted.
We must incline to the king.
I will look him and privilyrelieve him.
Go you and maintain talk withthe duke,
that my charity be not of himperceived.
If he ask for me, I am ill andgone to bed.
If I die for it, as no less isthreatened me,
the king, my old master, must berelieved.
There are strange things toward,Edmund.
Pray you, be careful.
Here is the place, my lord.
Good my lord, enter.
The tyranny of the open night'stoo rough for nature to endure.
Let me alone.
Good my lord, enter here.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own.
Good my lord, enter.
Thou think'st 'tis much
that this contentious storminvades us to the skin.
So 'tis to thee.
But where the greater malady isfixed,
the lesser is scarce felt.
Thou'ldst shun a bear,
but if thy flight lay toward theroaring sea,
thou'ldst meet the bear i' themouth.
When the mind's free, the body'sdelicate.
The tempest in my mind does frommy senses take all feeling
else save what beats there.
Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth wouldtear this hand
for lifting food to it?
But I will punish home.
No, I will weep no more.
In such a night to shut me out.
Pour on!
I will endure!
In such a night as this.
O Regan, Goneril.
Thy old kind father, whose frankheart gave all
O, that way madness lies.
Let me shun that. No more ofthat.
Good my lord, enter here.
Prithee, go in thyself.
Take thine own ease.
This tempest will not give meleave
to ponder on things would hurtme more.
But I'll go in.
In, boy. Go first.
You houseless poverty
nay, get thee in.
I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
Poor naked wretches, whereso'eryou are,
that bide the pelting of thispitiless storm,
how shall your houseless headsand unfed sides,
your looped and windowedraggedness
defend you from seasons such asthese?
O, I have ta'en too little careof this.
Take physic, pomp.
Expose thyself to feel whatwretches feel
that thou mayest shake thesuperflux to them
and show the heavens more just.
Fathom and a half, fathom and ahalf!
Poor Tom!
Come not in here, nuncle!
Help me! Help me!
Give me thy hand.
Who's there?
A spirit; he says his name'spoor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumblethere in the straw?
Come forth!
Away!
The foul fiend follows me.
Through the sharp hawthorn blowsthe cold wind.
Ha!
Go to thy cold bed, and warmthee.
Hast thou given all to thy twodaughters?
And art thou come to this?
Who gives anything to poor Tom,
whom the foul fiend hath ledthrough fire and through flame,
through ford and whirlipool e'erbog and quagmire,
that hath laid knives under hispillow
and halters in his pew,
set ratsbane by his porridge,made film proud of heart
to ride on a bay trotting-horseover four-inched bridges,
to course his own shadow for atraitor.
Bless thy five wits.
Tom's a-cold.
Ah, do de, do de, do de.
Bless thee from whirlwinds,star-blasting, and taking.
Do poor Tom some charity, whomthe foul fiend vexes.
There could I have him now
and there, there, there, there.
What, have his daughters broughthim to this pass?
Couldst thou save nothing?
Wouldst thou give them all?
Nay, he reserved a blanket, elsewe had been all shamed.
Now, all the plagues that in thependulous air
hang fated o'er men's faultslight on thy daughters!
He hath no daughters, sir.
Death, traitor!
Nothing could have subduednature
to such a lowness but his unkinddaughters.
Is it the fashion that discardedfathers
should have thus little mercy ontheir flesh?
Judicious punishment!
'Twas this flesh begot thosepelican daughters.
This cold night will turn us allto fools and madmen!
Take heed o' the foul fiend.Obey thy parents.
Keep thy word justly. Swear not.
Commit not with man's swornspouse.
Set not thy sweet heart on proudarray.
Tom's a-cold.
What hast thou been?
A serving-man, proud in heartand mind
that curled my hair, wore glovesin my cap,
served the lust of my mistress'heart
and did the act of darkness withher,
swore as many oaths as I spakewords,
and broke them in the sweet faceof heaven.
One that slept in the contrivingof lust
and waked to do it.
Wine loved I deeply, dicedearly,
and in woman out-paramoured theTurk.
False of heart, light of ear,bloody of hand,
hog in sloth, fox in stealth,wolf in greediness,
dog in madness, lion in prey.
Let not the creaking of shoesnor the rustling of silks
betray thy poor heart to woman.
Keep thy foot out of brothels,thy hand out of plackets,
thy pen from lenders' books, anddefy the foul fiend.
Still through the hawthorn blowsthe cold wind.
Sing sum, mun, nonny.
Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa!
Let him trot by.
Thou wert better in a grave thanto answer
with thy uncovered body thisextremity of the skies.
Is man no more than this?
Consider him well.
Thou owest the worm no silk, thebeast no hide,
the sheep no wool, the cat noperfume.
Ha!
Here's three on 's aresophisticated.
Thou art the thing itself.
Unaccommodated man is no more
but such a poor, bare, forkedanimal as thou art.
Off, off, you lendings!
Come unbutton here!
Be contented!
'Tis a naughty night to swim in.
Now a little fire in a darkfield
were like an old lecher's heart:
a small spark, all the rest on'sbody cold.
Look, look, here comes a walkingfire.
This is the foul fiendFlibbertigibbet.
He begins at curfew and walkstill the first cock.
He gives the web and the pin,squints the eye,
and makes the hare-lip,
mildews the white wheat,
and hurts the poor creature ofEarth.
How fares Your Grace?
What's he?
Who's there?
What is't you seek?
What are you there? Your names?
Poor Tom that eats the swimmingfrog, the toad,
the tadpole, the wall-newt andthe water;
that in the fury of his heart,when the foul fiend rages,
eats cow dung for sallets,
swallows the old rat and theditch-dog,
drinks the green mantle of thestanding pool;
that is whipped from tithing totithing
and stock-punished, andimprisoned;
that hath had three suits to hisback,
six shirts to his body, horse toride,
and weapon to wear.
But mice and rats and such smalldeer
have been Tom's food for sevenlong year.
Beware my follower.
Peace, Smulkin.
Peace, thou fiend!
What, hath Your Grace no bettercompany?
The prince of darkness is agentleman.
Modo he's called, and Mahu.
Our flesh and blood, my lord, isgrown so vile,
that it doth hate what gets it.
Poor Tom's a-cold.
Go in with me.
My duty cannot suffer to obey
in all your daughters' hardcommands.
Though their injunction be tobar my doors,
yet have I ventured to come seekyou out
and bring you where both fireand food is ready.
First let me talk with thisphilosopher.
What is the cause of thunder?
Good my lord, take his offer.
Go into the house.
I'll talk a word with this samelearned Theban.
What is thy study?
How to prevent the foul fiendand to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word inprivate.
Importune him once more to go,my lord.
His wits begin to unsettle.
Canst thou blame him?
His daughters seek his death.
Oh, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poorbanished man.
Thou sayest the king grows mad.
I'll tell thee, friend, I amalmost mad myself.
I had a son, now outlawed frommy blood.
He sought my life but lately,very late.
I loved him, friend no fatherhis son dearer.
Truth to tell thee, the griefhath crazed my wits.
What a night's this.
I do beseech Your Graceó
O, cry your mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.
This way, my lord.
In there, fellow.
Good my lord, soothe him.
Let him take the fellow!
This way! This way, fellow!
Come along with us.
Come. Come.
No words, no words. Hush!
Child Rowland to the dark towercame.
His word was still, "Fie, foh,and fum,
I smell the blood of a Britishman."
I will have my revenge ereI depart his house.
How, my lord, I may becensured,
that nature thus gives wayto loyalty,
something fears me tothink of.
I now perceive it was notaltogether
your brother's evildisposition that made himseek his death
but a provoking merit seta-work
by a reprovable badness inhimself.
How malicious is myfortune, that I mustrepent to be just.
This is the letter hespoke of,
which approves him anintelligent party
to the advantages ofFrance.
O heavens, that thistreason were not
or not I the detector.
Go with me to the duchess.
If the matter of thispaper be certain,
you have mighty businessin hand.
True or false, it hath madethee earl of Gloucester.
Seek out where thy fatheris,
that he may be ready forour apprehension.
I will persevere in mycourse of loyalty,
though the conflict be sorebetween that and my blood.
I will lay trust uponthee,
and thou shalt find adearer father in my love.
Here is better than theopen air.
Take it thankfully.
I will piece out the comfortwith what addition I can.
I will not be longfrom you.
All the power of his witshave given way to hisimpatience.
The gods reward yourkindness.
Frateretto calls me
and tells me Nero is anangler in the lake ofdarkness.
Pray, innocent, and bewarethe foul fiend.
Prithee, nuncle, tell mewhether a madman be
a gentleman or a yeoman.
A king, a king.
No, he's a yeoman that hasa gentleman to his son,
for he's a mad yeoman
that sees his son agentleman before him.
To have a thousand withred burning spits
come hissing in upon 'em
The foul fiend bites myback.
He's mad that trusts inthe tameness of a wolf,
a horse's health, a boy'slove, or a whore's oath.
It shall be done; I willarraign them straight.
Come, sit thou here, mostlearned justicer.
Thou, sapient sir, sitthere.
Now, you she-foxes!
Look, where he stands andglares.
Want'st thou eyes attrial, madam?
Come o'er the bourn,Bessy, to me.
Her boat hath a leak, andshe must not speak
why she dare not come overto thee.
The foul fiend haunts Tom inthe voice of a nightingale.
Hopdance cries in Tom's bellyfor two white herrings.
Croak not, black angel; Ihave no food for thee.
How do you, sir?
Stand you not so amazed.
Will you lie down and restupon the cushions?
I'll see their trialfirst.
Bring in their evidence.
Thou robed man of justice,take thy place.
And thou, his yoke-fellowof equity,
bench by his side.
You are o' the commission;sit you too.
Let us deal justly.
Arraign her first, 'tisGoneril.
I here take my oath beforethis honorable assembly,
she kicked the poor king,her father.
Come hither, mistress.
Is your name Goneril?
She cannot deny it.
Cry you mercy, I took youfor a joint-stool.
And there's another, whosewarped looks proclaim
what store her heart ismade upon.
Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire!
Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why didstthou let her 'scape?
Bless thy wits.
O pity, sir, where is thepatience now
that you so oft haveboasted to retain?
My tears begin to take hispart so much,
they mar mycounterfeiting.
The little dogs and allTray, Blanch, and Sweetheart
see, they bark at me.
Tom will throw his head atthem.
Avaunt, you curs!
Then let them anatomizeRegan,
see what breeds about herheart.
Is there any cause innature that make thesehard hearts?
You, sir, I entertain forone of my hundred,
only I do not like thefashion of your garments.
You will say they arePersian, but let them bechanged.
Now, good my lord, liehere and rest awhile.
Hmm?
Make no noise. Make nonoise.
Draw the curtains.
So.
We'll go to supper in themorning.
And I'll go to bed atnoon.
Come hither, friend.
Where is the king,my master?
Here, sir, but trouble himnot; his wits are gone.
Good friend, I prithee,take him in thine arms.
I have o'erheard a plot ofdeath upon him.
There is a litter ready.
Lay him in 't and drivetoward Dover, friend,
where thou shalt meet bothwelcome and protection.
Take up thy master.
If thou shouldst dallyhalf an hour,
his life, with thine,
and all that offer todefend him
stand of assured loss.
Take up. Take up.
And follow me, that willto some provision
give thee quick comfort.
Oppressed nature sleeps.
This rest might yet havebalmed thy broken sinews,
which, if convenience willnot allow,
stand in hard cure.
Come, help to bear thymaster.
Come, thou must not staybehind.
Come, come, away.
When we our betters seebearing our woes,
we scarcely think ourmiseries our foes.
Who alone suffers suffersmost in the mind,
leaving free things andhappy shows behind.
But then the mind muchsufferance doth o'er skip
when grief hath mates andbearing fellowship.
How light and portable mypain seems now
when that which makes mebend makes the king bow.
He childed as I fathered.
Tom, away.
Mark the high noises andthyself bewray
when false opinion,
whose wrong thoughtsdefile thee,
in thy just proof repealsand reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight,safe 'scape the king.
Lurk.
Post speedily to my lordyour husband.
Show him this letter.
The army of France islanded.
Seek out the traitorGloucester.
Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to mydispleasure.
Edmund, keep you oursister company.
The revenges we are boundto take
upon your traitorousfather are not fit foryour beholding.
Advise the duke where youare going,
to a most festinatepreparation.
We are bound to the like.
Our posts shall be swiftand intelligent betwixt us.
Farewell, dearest sister.
Farewell, my lord ofGloucester.
How now? Where's the king?
My lord of Gloucester hathconveyed him hence.
Some five or six andthirty of his knights,
hot questrists after him,met him at gate,
who, with some other ofthe lords dependants,
are gone with him towardsDover,
where they boast to havewell-armed friends.
Get horses for yourmistress.
Farewell, sweet lord andsister.
Go seek the traitorGloucester.
Pinion him like a thief.
Bring him before us.
Though well we may notpass upon his life
without the form ofjustice,
yet our power shall do acourtesy to our wrath,
which men may blame butnot control.
Who's there? The traitor?
Ingrateful fox, 'tis he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What means Your Graces?
Good my friends, consideryou are my guests.
Do me no foul play,friends.
Bind him, I say.
Hard.
O filthy traitor!
Unmerciful lady as youare, I'm none.
Villain, thou shalt find
By the kind gods, 'tismost ignobly done
to pluck me by the beard.
So white, and such atraitor.
Naughty lady, these hairs,
which thou dost ravishfrom my chin,
will quicken and accusethee.
I am your host.
With robbers' hands,
my hospitable favors youshould not ruffle thus.
What will you do?
Come, sir, what lettershad you late from France?
Be simple answerer, for weknow the truth.
And what confederacy haveyou with the traitors
late footed in thekingdom?
To whose hands have yousent the lunatic king?
Speak.
I have a letter,guessingly set down,
that came from one that'sof a neutral heart
and not from one opposed.
Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent theking?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover?
Wast thou not charged atperil
Let him first answer that.
I am tied to the stake, andI must stand the course.
Wherefore to Dover?
Because I would not seethy cruel nails
pluck out his poor oldeyes, nor thy fierce sister
in his anointed fleshstick boarish fangs.
But I shall see the wingedvengeance
overtake such children.
See't shalt thou never.
Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine,I'll set my foot.
He that will think to livetill he be old,
give me some help!
O cruel!
O ye gods!
One side will mock theother t'other too.
If you see vengeance
Hold your hand, my lord.
I have served you eversince I was a child,
but better service have Inever given you
than now to bid you hold.
How now, you dog!
If you did wear a beardupon your chin,
I'd shake it on thisquarrel.
What do you mean?
My villain!
Nay, then, come on, andtake the chance of anger.
Give me thy sword.
A peasant stand up thus!
O, I am slain!
My lord, you have one eyeleft to see some mischiefon him.
Lest it see more, preventit.
Out!
Vile jelly!
Where is thy luster now?
Dark and comfortless.
Where's my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all thesparks of nature
to quit this horrid act!
Out, treacherous villain.
Thou call'st upon him thathates thee.
It was he that made theovertures of thy treasonto us,
who is too good to pitythee.
O my follies.
Then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me thatand prosper him.
Go, thrust him out atgate.
Let him smell his way toDover.
How is't with you, mylord?
How look you?
I have received a hurt.
Follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyelessvillain.
Throw this slave upon thedunghill.
Regan, I bleed apace.
Untimely comes this hurt.
Give me your arm.
I'll never care whatwickedness I do
if this man come to good.
If she live long
and, in the end, meet theold course of death,
women will all turnmonsters.
I'll get some flax andwhites of eggs
to apply to his bleedingface.
Now heaven help him.
Yet better thus and knownto be contemned
than still contemned andflattered.
To be worst,
the lowest and mostdejected thing of fortune,
stands still in esperance,lives not in fear.
The lamentable change isfrom the best.
The worst returns tolaughter.
Welcome, then,
thou unsubstantial airthat I embrace.
The wretch that thou hastblown unto the worst
owes nothing to thyblasts.
But who comes here?
My father, poorly led?
World, world, O world.
But that thy strangemutations make us hate thee,
life would not yield toage.
O, my good lord, I havebeen your tenant
and your father's tenantthese fourscore years.
Away, get thee away.
Good friend, be gone.
Thy comforts can do me nogood at all.
Thee, they may hurt.
But you cannot see yourway.
I have no way andtherefore want no eyes.
I stumbled when I saw.
Full oft 'tis seen, ourmeans secure us,
and our mere defects proveour commodities.
O dear son Edgar,
the food of thy abusedfather's wrath.
Might I but live to seethee in my touch,
I'd say I had eyes again.
How now?
Who's there?
O gods!
Who is't can say "I am atthe worst"?
I am worse than e'er Iwas.
'Tis poor mad Tom.
And worse I may be yet.
The worst is not
so long as we can say,"This is the worst."
Fellow, where goest?
Is it a beggar man?
Madman and beggar too.
He has some reason, elsehe could not beg.
In the last night's storm,I such a fellow saw
that made me think a man aworm.
My son came then into mymind,
and yet my mind was thenscarce friends with him.
I have heard more since.
As flies to wanton boysare we to the gods!
They kill us for theirsport.
How should this be?
Bad is the trade that mustplay fool to sorrow,
angering itself andothers.
Bless thee, master!
Is it the naked fellow?
Aye, my lord.
Then, prithee, get theegone.
If, for my sake, thou wilto'ertake us,
hence a mile or twain, i'the way toward Dover,
do it for ancient love,
and bring some coveringfor this naked soul,
which I'll entreat to leadme.
Alack, sir, he is mad.
'Tis the times' plague whenmadmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, orrather do thy pleasure.
Above the rest, be gone.
I'll get him the bestapparel that I have,
come on't what will.
Sirrah, naked fellow.
Poor Tom's a-cold.
I cannot daub it further.
Come hither, fellow.
And yet I must.
Bless thy sweet eyes, theybleed.
Dost thou know the way toDover?
Both stile and gate,horseway and footpath.
Poor Tom hath been scaredout of his good wits.
Bless thee, good man'sson, from the foul fiend!
Five fiends have been inpoor Tom at once:
of lust, as Obidicut;
Hobbididence, prince ofdumbness;
Mahu, of murder; Modo, ofstealing;
Flibbertigibbet, ofmopping and mowing,
who since possesseschambermaids and waitingwomen.
So bless thee, master.
Here, take this purse,
thou whom the heavens'plagues have humbled toall strokes.
That I am wretched makesthee the happier.
Heavens, deal so still.
Let the superfluous andlust-dieted man
that slaves yourordinance,
that will not see becausehe doth not feel,
feel your power quickly.
So distribution shouldundo excess
and each man have enough.
Dost thou know Dover?
Aye, master.
There is a cliff, whosehigh and bending head
looks fearfully in theconfined deep.
Bring me but to the verybrim of it,
and I'll repair the miserythou dost bear
with something rich aboutme.
From that place, I shallno leading need.
Give me thy hand.
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome, my lord.
I marvel our mild husbandnot met us on the way.
Now, where's your master?
Madam, within, but neverman so changed.
I told him of the armythat was landed;
he smiled at it.
I told him you werecoming; his answer was,"The worse."
Of Gloucester's treachery
and of the loyal serviceof his son,
when I informed him, thenhe called me sot
and told me I had turnedthe wrong side out.
What most he shoulddislike seems pleasant tohim;
what like, offensive.
Then shall you go nofurther.
It is the cowish terror ofhis spirit
that dares not undertake.
He'll not feel wrongswhich tie him to ananswer.
Our wishes on the way mayprove effects.
Back, Edmund, to mybrother.
Hasten his musters, andconduct his powers.
I must change arms at home
and give the distaff intomy husband's hands.
This trusty servant shallpass between us.
Ere long you are like tohear,
if you dare venture inyour own behalf,
a mistress's command.
Wear this.
No, spare speech.
Decline your head.
This kiss, if it durstspeak,
would stretch thy spiritsup into the air.
Conceive, and fare theewell.
Yours in the ranks ofdeath.
My most dear Gloucester.
O, the difference of manand man.
To thee, a woman'sservices are due.
My fool usurps my body.
Madam, here comes my lord.
I have been worth thewhistle.
O Goneril.
You are not worth the dust
which the rude wind blowsin your face.
I fear your disposition.
That nature, whichcontemns its origin,
cannot be bordered certainin itself.
She that herself willsliver and disbranch
from her material sap
perforce must wither andcome to deadly use.
No more; the text isfoolish.
Wisdom and goodness to thevile seem vile.
Filths savor butthemselves.
What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters,what have you performed?
A father and a graciousaged man
whose reverence even thehead-lugged bear would lick
most barbarous, mostdegenerate,
have you madded.
Could my good brothersuffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him sobenefited?
If that the heavens do nottheir visible spirits
send quickly down to tamethese vile offenses,
it will come.
Humanity must perforceprey on itself
like monsters of the deep.
Milk-livered man
that bear'st a cheek forblows, a head for wrongs,
who hast not in thy brows
an eye discerning thinehonor from thy suffering,
that not know'st fools dothose villains pity
who are punished ere theyhave done their mischief.
Where's thy drum?
France spreads his bannersin our noiseless land.
With plumed helm, thystate begins to threat
whilst thou, a moral fool,
sit'st still and criest,"Alack, why does he so?"
See thyself, devil.
Proper deformity shows notin the fiend
so horrid as in woman.
O, vain fool!
Thou changed and self-coveredthing, for shame.
Be-monster not thyfeature.
Were it my fitness to letthese hands obey my blood,
they are apt enough todislocate and tear thyflesh and bones.
Howe'er thou art a fiend,
a woman's shape dothshield thee.
Marry, your manhood.
What news?
O, my good lord, the Dukeof Cornwall's dead,
slain by his servant,
going to put out the othereye of Gloucester.
Gloucester's eye?
A servant that he bred,thrilled with remorse,
opposed against the act,
bending his sword to hisgreat master,
who, thereat enraged, flewon him
and amongst them felledhim dead
but not without thatharmful stroke
which since hath pluckedhim after.
This shows you are above,you justicers,
that these, our nethercrimes, so speedily canvenge.
O poor Gloucester, lost hehis other eye?
Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, cravesa speedy answer.
'Tis from your sister.
One way I like this well.
But being widow and myGloucester with her,
may all the building of myfancy pluck
upon my hateful life.
Another way, the news isnot so tart.
I'll read and answer.
Where was his son whenthey did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.
He is not here.
No, my good lord; I methim back again.
Knows he the wickedness?
Aye, my good lord; 'twashe informed against him
and quit the house onpurpose
that their punishmentmight have the freercourse.
Gloucester, I live tothank thee
for the love thou show'dstthe king
and to revenge thine eyes.
Come hither, friend. Tellme what more thou know'st.
Alack, 'tis he.
Why, he was met even nowas mad as the vexed sea,
singing aloud,
crowned with rank fumiterand furrow-weeds,
with hardocks, hemlock,nettles, cuckoo-flowers,Darnel,
and all the idle weedsthat grow in oursustaining corn.
A century send forth.
Search every acre in thehigh-grown field,
and bring him to our eye.
What can man's wisdom
in the restoring hisbereaved sense?
He that helps him take allmy outward worth.
There is means, madam.
Our foster-nurse of natureis repose,
the which he lacks.
That to provoke in him aremany simples operative
whose power will close theeye of anguish.
All blest secrets,
all you unpublishedvirtues of the Earth,
spring with my tears.
Be aidant and remediate inthe good man's distress.
Seek, seek for him, lesthis ungoverned rage
dissolve the life thatwants the means to lead it.
News, madam.
The British powers aremarching hitherward.
'Tis known before;
our preparation stands inexpectation of them.
O dear father,
it is thy business that Igo about.
Therefore, great France
my mourning and importunetears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth ourarms incite
but love, dear love, andour aged father's right.
Soon may I hear and seehim.
But are my brother'spowers set forth?
Aye, madam.
Himself in person there?
Madam, with much ado.
Your sister is the bettersoldier.
Lord Edmund spoke not toyour lord at home?
No, madam.
What might import mysister's letter to him?
I know not, lady.
'Faith, he is posted henceon serious matter.
It was great ignorance,Gloucester's eyes being out,
to let him live.
Where he arrives, he movesall hearts against us.
Edmund, I think, is gone,in pity of his misery,
to dispatch his nightedlife
moreover, to descry thestrength o' the enemy.
I must needs after him,madam, with my letter.
Our troops set forthtomorrow.
Stay with us; the ways aredangerous.
I may not, madam.
My lady charged my duty inthis business.
Why should she write toEdmund?
Might not you transporther purposes by word?
Belike, somethings I knownot what.
I'll love thee much; letme unseal the letter.
Madam, I had rather
I know your lady does notlove her husband.
I'm sure of that.
And at her late beinghere, she gave strangeoeillades
and most speaking looks tonoble Edmund.
- I know you are of herbosom. - I?
I speak in understanding.You are; I know it.
Therefore I do advisethee, take this note.
My lord is dead.
Edmund and I have talked.
And more convenient is hefor my hand
than for your lady's.
You may gather more.
If you do find him, prayyou, give him this.
And when your mistresshears thus much from you,I pray,
desire her call her wisdomto her.
And so farewell.
If you do chance to hearof that blind traitor,
preferment falls on himthat cuts him off.
Would I could meet him,madam.
I should show what party Ido follow.
Fare thee well.
When shall I come to thetop of that same hill?
You do climb up it now.
Look how we labor.
Methinks the ground iseven.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?
No, truly.
Why, then, your othersenses grow imperfect
by your eyes' anguish.
So may it be, indeed.
Methinks thy voice isaltered and thou speak'st
in better phrase andmatter than thou didst.
You are much deceived.
In nothing am I changedbut in my garments.
Methinks you're betterspoken.
Come on, sir.
Here's the place.
Stand still.
How fearful and dizzy 'tisto cast one's eyes so low.
The crows and choughs thatwing the midway air
show scarce so gross asbeetles.
Halfway down hangs one
that gathers samphire,dreadful trade.
Methinks he seems nobigger than his head.
The fishermen that walkupon the beach
appear like mice
and yond tall anchoring bark,diminished to her cock,
her cock a buoy almost toosmall for sight.
The murmuring surge
that on the unnumberedidle pebbles chafes
cannot be heard so high.
I'll look no more lest mybrain turn
and the deficient sighttopple down headlong.
Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand.
You are now within a footof the extreme verge.
For all beneath the moonwould I not leap upright.
Let go my hand.
Here, friend, 's anotherpurse,
in it a jewel well worth apoor man's taking.
Fairies and gods prosperit with thee.
Go thou further off.
Bid me farewell, and letme hear thee going.
Now fare you well, goodsir!
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus withhis despair
is done to cure it.
O you mighty gods.
This world I do renounceand, in your sights,
shake patiently my greataffliction off.
If I could bear it longerand not fall to quarrel
with your great opposelesswills,
my snuff and loathed partof nature
should burn itself out.
If Edgar live, O, blesshim.
Now, fellow, fare theewell.
Gone, sir! Farewell!
And yet I know not howconceit may rob thetreasury of life
when life itself yields tothe theft.
Had he been where hethought, by this, hadthought been past.
Alive or dead?
Ho, you sir.
Friend?
Hear you, sir.
Speak.
Thus might he pass indeed.
Yet he revives.
What are you, sir?
Away, and let me die.
Hadst thou been aught butgossamer, feathers, air,
so many fathoms downprecipitating,
thou'dst shiver'st like anegg.
But thou dost breathe,hast heavy substance,
bleed'st not, speak'st,art sound.
Ten masts at each make notthe altitude
which thou hastperpendicularly fell.
Thy life's a miracle.
Speak yet again.
Have I fallen, or no?
From the dread summit ofthis chalky bourn.
Look up a-height.
The shrill-gorged lark cannotbe seen or heard so far.
Do but look up.
Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness deprivedthat benefit
to end itself by death?
'Twas yet some comfort,
when misery could beguilethe tyrant's rage
and frustrate his proudwill.
Give me your arm.
Up.
So.
How is 't?
Feel you your legs?
You stand.
Too well, too well.
This is above allstrangeness.
Upon the crown o' thecliff,
what thing was that whichparted from you?
A poor unfortunate beggar.
As I stood here below,
methought his eyes weretwo full moons.
He had a thousand noses,
horns whelked and wavedlike the enridged sea.
It was some fiend.
Therefore, thou happyfather, think that theclearest gods,
who make them honors ofmen's impossibilities,
have preserved thee.
I do remember now.
Henceforth, I'll bearaffliction
till it do cry out itself,"Enough, enough," and die.
That thing you speak of, Itook it for a man.
Often 'twould say, "Thefiend, the fiend."
He led me to that place.
Bear free and patientthoughts.
Huh?
Who comes here?
No, they cannot touch mefor coining;
I am the king himself.
O thou side-piercingsight.
Nature's above art in thatrespect.
There's your press-money.
The fellow handles his bowlike a crow-keeper.
Draw me a clothier's yard!
Look, look, a mouse.
See, see, this piece oftoasted cheese will do it.
There's my gauntlet.
I'll prove it on a giant.
Bring up the brown bills!
O, well flown, bird.
I' the clout, i' theclout, pssshw!
Give the word.
Sweet marjoram.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ah!
Goneril, with a whitebeard!
They flattered me like adog,
told me I had white hairsin my beard
before the black ones werethere.
To say "aye" and "no" toeverything that I said.
"Aye" and "no" too was nogood divinity.
When the rain came to wetme once
and the wind to make mechatter,
when the thunder would notpeace at my bidding,
there I found 'em.
There I smelt 'em out.
Go to, they're not men o'their words.
They told me I waseverything.
'Tis a lie; I am notague-proof.
The trick of that voice Ido well remember.
Is it not the king?
Aye, every inch a king.
When I do stare, see howthe subject quakes.
I pardon that man's life.
What was thy cause?
Adultery?
Thou shalt not die.
Die for adultery? No.
The wren goes to 't.
The small gilded fly doeslecher in my sight.
Let copulation thrive,
for Gloucester's bastardson was kinder to hisfather
than my daughters got'tween the lawful sheets.
To it, luxury, pell-mell.
For I lack soldiers.
Behold yond simperingdame,
whose face between herforks presages snow,
that minces virtue
and does shake the head tohear of pleasure's name.
The fitchew, nor thesoiled horse,
goes to 't with a moreriotous appetite.
Down from the waist, theyare centaurs,
though women all above.
But to the girdle do thegods inherit;
beneath is all thefiends'.
There's hell, there'sdarkness, there is thesulfurous pit.
Burning, scalding, stench,consumption.
Fie, fie, fie!
Agh!
Give me an ounce of civet,good apothecary,
to sweeten my imagination.
There's money for thee.
O, let me kiss that hand.
Let me wipe it first; itsmells of mortality.
O ruined piece of nature.
This great world shall sowear out to naught.
Dost thou know me?
I remember thine eyes wellenough.
Dost squinny at me?
No, do thy worst, blindCupid;
I'll not love.
Read thou this challenge.
Mark but the penning ofit.
Were all thy letters suns,I could not see one.
I would not take this fromreport.
It is, and my heart breaksat it.
Read!
What, with the case ofeyes?
O, ho, are you there withme?
No eyes in your head norno money in your purse?
Your eyes are in a heavy caseand your purse in a light.
Yet you may see how thisworld goes.
I see it feelingly.
What, art mad?
A man may see how thisworld goes with no eyes.
Look with thine ears.
See how yond justice railson yond simple thief.
Hark, in thine ear.
Change places and,handy-dandy,
which is the justice andwhich the thief?
Hast seen a farmer's dogbark at a beggar?
Aye, sir.
And the creature run fromthe cur?
There thou mightst beholdthe great image ofauthority.
A dog's obeyed in office.
Woof, woof, woof!
Thou rascal beadle, holdthy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash thatwhore?
Thou hotly lust'st to useher in that kind
for which thou whipp'sther.
The usurer hangs thecozener.
Through tattered clothes,small vices do appear.
Robes and furred gownshide all.
Plate sin with gold,
and the strong lance ofjustice hurtless breaks.
Arm it in rags, a pigmy'sstraw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, Isay, none.
I'll able 'em.
Take this of me, myfriend,
who have the power to sealthe accuser's lips.
Get thee glass eyes and,like a scurvy politician,
seem to see the thingsthou dost not.
Now, now, now, now.
Pull off my boots.
Harder, harder.
So.
O, matter and impertinencymixed.
Reason in madness.
If thou wilt weep myfortune, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough;thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient!
We came crying hither.
Thou know'st, the firsttime that we smell the air,
we wawl and cry.
I will preach to thee.Mark.
Alack, alack the day.
When we are born, we crythat we are come
to this great stage offools.
This a good block.
It were a delicatestratagem
to shoe a troop of horsewith felt.
I'll put it in proof,
and when I've stolen uponthese son-in-laws,
then, kill, kill...
Here he is. Lay a handupon him.
Sir, your most deardaughter
No rescue?
What, a prisoner?
I am even the natural foolof fortune.
Use me well; you shallhave ransom.
Let me have surgeons; I amcut to the brains.
You shall have anything.
No seconds?
All myself?
Why, this would make a mana man of salt,
to use his eyes for gardenwater-pots,
aye, and laying autumn'sdust.
Good sir.
I will die bravely, like asmug bridegroom.
What?
I will be jovial.
Come, come.
I am a king, my masters.
Know you that?
You are a royal one, andwe obey you.
Then there's life in't.
And you shall get it, youshall get it by running!
A sight most pitiful inthe meanest wretch,
past speaking of in aking.
Hail, gentle sir.
Sir, speed you. What'syour will?
Do you know aught, sir, ofa battle toward?
Most sure and vulgar.
Everyone hears that, whichcan distinguish sound.
But, by your favor, hownear's the other army?
Near and on speedy foot.
The main descry stands onthe hourly thought.
I thank you, sir. That'sall.
Though that the queen onspecial cause is here,
her army is moved on.
I thank you, sir.
You ever-gentle gods, takemy breath from me.
Let not my worser spirittempt me again
to die before you please.
Well pray you, father.
Now, good sir, what areyou?
A most poor man, made tameto fortune's blows
who, by the art of knownand feeling sorrows,
am pregnant to good pity.
Give me your arm; I'lllead you to some biding.
Hearty thanks.
The bounty and the benisonof heaven to boot andboot.
A proclaimed prize.
Most happy.
That eyeless head of thine
was first framed flesh toraise my fortunes.
Thou old unhappy traitor,briefly thyself remember.
The sword is out that mustdestroy thee.
O, let thy friendly handput strength enough to't.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
darest thou support apublished traitor?
Hence, lest that theinfection of his fortune take
like hold on thee.
Let go his arm.
Let go, slave, or thoudiest.
Out, dunghill!
Slave, thou hast slain me.
Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive,bury my body.
And take the letters whichthou find'st about me
to Edmund, Earl ofGloucester.
Seek him out upon theEnglish party.
O, untimely death.
Death.
I know thee well: aserviceable villain,
as duteous to the vices ofthy mistress
as badness would desire.
What, is he dead?
Let's see; the letter thathe speaks of
may be my friend.
Leave, gentle wax.
And, manners, blame usnot.
To know our enemies'minds, we'd rip theirhearts.
Their papers is mostlawful.
"Let our reciprocal vowsberemembered.
"You have many opportunitiesto cut him off.
"If your will want not,
"time and place will befruitfully offered.
"There is nothing done ifhe return the conqueror.
"Then am I the prisonerand his bed my jail,
"from the loathed warmthwhereof deliver me
"and supply the place foryour labor.
"Your wife so I would say
Affectionate servant,Goneril."
O indistinguished space ofwoman's will.
A plot upon her virtuoushusband's life
and the exchange mybrother.
The king is mad.
How stiff is my vilesense, that I stand up
and have ingeniousfeelings of my hugesorrows.
Better I were distract.
So should my thoughts besevered from my griefs
and woes by wrongimaginations
lose the knowledge ofthemselves.
Give me your hand.
Far off, methinks, I hearthe beaten drum.
Come, father; I'll bestowyou with a friend.
O thou good Kent,
how shall I live and workto match thy goodness?
My life will be too shortand every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged, madam,is o'erpaid.
All my reports go with themodest truth
nor more nor clipped, butso.
Be better suited.
These weeds are memoriesof those worser hours.
I prithee, put them off.
Pardon, dear madam.
Yet to be known shortensmy made intent.
My boon I make it that youknow me not
till time and I thinkmeet.
Then be it so, my goodlord.
How does the king?
Madam, sleeps still.
O you kind gods,
cure this great breach inhis abused nature.
The untuned and jarringsenses,
O, wind up of thischild-changed father.
So please Your Majestythat we may wake the king.
He hath slept long.
Be governed by yourknowledge,
and proceed in the sway ofyour own will.
Is he arrayed?
Aye, madam; in theheaviness of his sleep,
we put fresh garments onhim.
Be by, good madam, when wedo awake him.
I doubt not of histemperance.
Very well.
Please you, draw near.
O my dear father.
Restoration, hang thymedicine on my lips,
and let this kiss repairthose violent harms
that my two sisters havein thy reverence made.
Kind and dear princess.
Had you not been theirfather,
these white flakes didchallenge pity of them.
Was this a face to beopposed against thewarring winds?
Mine enemy's dog, thoughhe had bit me,
should have stood thatnight against my fire.
And wast thou fain, poorfather, to hovel thee
with swine and roguesforlorn in short and mustystraw?
Alack, alack.
'Tis wonder that thy lifeand wits at once
had not concluded all.
He wakes. Speak to him.
Madam, do you. 'Tisfittest.
How does my royal lord?
How fares Your Majesty?
You do me wrong to take meout o' the grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss,
but I am bound upon awheel of fire
which mine own tears doscald like molten lead.
Sir, do you know me?
You are a spirit, I know.
Where did you die?
Still, still, far wide.
He's scarce awake; let himalone awhile.
Where have I been?
Where am I?
Fair daylight?
I am mightily abused.
I would e'en die with pityto see another thus.
I know not what to say.
I will not swear these aremy hands.
Let's see.
I feel this pinprick.
Would I were assured of mycondition.
O, look upon me, sir,
and hold your hands inbenediction o'er me.
No, sir, you must notkneel.
Pray, do not mock me.
I am a very foolish, fondold man,
fourscore and upward, notan hour more nor less.
And, to deal plainly, Ifear I am not in myperfect mind.
Methinks I should know youand know this man.
Yet I am doubtful,
for I am mainly ignorantwhat place this is.
All my skill remembers notthese garments.
Nor I know not where I didlodge last night.
Do not laugh at me, for asI am a man,
I think this lady to be mychild Cordelia.
So I am. I am.
Be thy tears wet?
Yes, 'faith.
If you have poison for me,I will drink it.
I know you do not love me,for your sisters have,
as I remember, done mewrong.
You have some cause; theyhave not.
No cause.
Am I in France?
In your own kingdom, sir.
Do not abuse me.
Be comforted, good madam.
The great rage, you see,is killed in him,
and yet it is danger
to make him even o'er thetime he has lost.
Will it please yourhighness walk?
You must bear with me.
Pray you now, forget andforgive.
I am old and foolish.
Holds it true, sir,
that the Duke of Cornwallwas so slain?
Most certain, sir.
Who is the conductor ofhis people?
As 'tis said, the bastardson of Gloucester.
They say Edgar, hisbanished son,
is with the Earl of Kentin Germany.
Report is changeable.
'Tis time to look about.
The powers of the kingdomapproach apace.
The arbitrament is like tobe bloody.
Fare you well, sir.
My point and period willbe truly wrought,
or well or ill, as thisday's battle's fought.
Now, sweet lord,
you know the goodness Iintend upon you.
Tell me but truly but thenspeak the truth,
do you not love my sister?
In honored love.
But have you never foundmy brother's way
to the forfended place?
No, by mine honor, madam.
I never shall endure her.
Dear my lord, be notfamiliar with her.
Fear me not.
She and the duke, herhusband
I had rather lose thebattle
than that sister shouldloosen him and me.
Our very loving sister,well be-met.
Sir, this I heard: theking is come to hisdaughter,
with others whom the rigorof our state forced to cryout.
Where I could not behonest, I never yet wasvaliant, for
Why is this reasoned?
Combine together 'gainstthe enemy,
for these domesticparticulars are not thequestion here.
Let's then determine
with the ancient of war onour proceeding.
Sister, you'll go with us?
No.
'Tis most convenient; Ipray you, go with us.
O, ho, I know the riddle.
I will go.
If e'er your grace hadspeech with man so poor,
hear me one word.
I'll overtake you! Speak.
Before you fight thebattle, ope this letter.
If you have victory,
let the trumpet sound forhim that brought it.
Wretched though I seem, Ican produce a champion
that will prove what isavouched there.
If you miscarry, yourbusiness of the world hathso an end,
and machination ceases.
Fortune love you.
Stay till I have read theletter.
I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, letbut the herald cry,
and I'll appear again.
Why, fare thee well.
I will o'erlook yourpaper.
The enemy's in view; drawup your powers.
Here is the guess of theirtrue strength and forces
by diligent discovery.
But your haste is nowurged on you.
We will greet the time.
To both these sisters haveI sworn my love,
each jealous of the otheras the stung are of theadder.
Which of them shall Itake?
Both? One?
Or neither?
Neither can be enjoyed ifboth remain alive.
To take the widowexasperates, makes mad hersister Goneril.
And hardly shall I carryout my side,
her husband being alive.
Now, then, we'll use hiscountenance for thebattle,
which, being done, let herwho would be rid of him
devise his speedy takingoff.
As for the mercy which heintends
to Lear and to Cordelia,
the battle done and theywithin our power
shall never see hispardon,
for my state stands on meto defend, not to debate.
Away, old man. Give me thyhand, away.
King Lear hath lost, heand his daughter ta'en.
Give me thy hand; come on.
No further, sir.
A man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughtsagain?
Men must endure theirgoing hence
even as their cominghither.
Ripeness is all.
Come on.
And that's true too.
Some officers, take themaway.
Good guard until theirgreater pleasures
first be known that are tocensure them.
We are not the first who,with best meaning,
have incurred the worst.
For thee, oppressed king,am I cast down.
Myself could else outfrownfalse fortune's frown.
Shall we not see thesedaughters and thesesisters?
No, no, no, no!
Come, let's away toprison.
We two alone will singlike birds i' the cage.
When thou dost ask meblessing, I'll kneel down,
and ask of theeforgiveness.
So we'll live and pray andsing and tell old tales,
and laugh at gildedbutterflies
and hear poor rogues talkof court news.
And we'll talk with themtoo, who loses and whowins,
who's in, who's out,
and take upon's themystery of things,
as if we were God's spies.
And we'll wear out, in awalled prison,
packs and sects of thegreat ones that ebb andflow by the moon.
Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices, myCordelia,
the gods themselves throwincense.
Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shallbring a brand from heaven
and fire us hence likefoxes.
Wipe thine eyes.
The good-years shalldevour them,
flesh and fell, ere theyshall make us weep.
We'll see 'em starvefirst.
Come.
Come hither, Captain.Hark.
Take thou this note.
Go follow them to prison.
One step, I have advancedthee.
If thou dost as thisinstructs thee,
thou dost make thy way tonoble fortunes.
Know thou this: that menare as the time is.
To be tender-minded doesnot become a sword.
Thy great employment willnot bear question.
Either say thou'lt do 't,or thrive by other means.
I'll do it, my lord.
About it, and write happywhen thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly,
and carry it so as I haveset it down.
I cannot draw a cart noreat dried oats.
If it be man's work, I'lldo it.
Sir, you have shown todayyour valiant strain,
and fortune led you well.
You have the captives
who were the opposites ofthis day's strife.
I do require them of you,so to use them
as we shall find theirmerits and our safety
may equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit tosend the old and miserableking
to some retention andappointed guard,
whose age had charms init, whose title more,
to pluck the common bosomon his side
an turn our impressedlances in our eyes
which do command them.
With him I sent the queen,my reason all the same.
And they are readytomorrow, or at furtherspace,
to appear where you shallhold your session.
Sir, by your patience, Ihold you
but a subject of this war,not as a brother.
That's as we list to gracehim.
Methinks our pleasuremight have been demanded,
'ere you spoke so far.
He hath led our powers,
bore the commission of myplace and person,
the which immediacy maywell stand up
and call itself yourbrother.
Not so hot.
In his own grace, he dothexalt himself
more than in youraddition.
In my rights, by meinvested, he compeers thebest.
That were the most if heshould husband you.
Jesters do oft proveprophets.
Holla, holla!
That eye that told you solooked but a-squint.
Lady, I am not well,
else't I should answerfrom a full-flowingstomach.
General, take thou mysoldiers, prisoners,patrimony.
Dispose of them, of me.
The walls is thine.
Witness the world
that I create thee here mylord and master.
Mean you to enjoy him?
The let-alone lies not inyour good will.
Nor in thine, lord.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
Let the drum strike andprove my title thine.
Stay yet; hear reason.
Edmund, I arrest thee oncapital treason
and, in thy attaint, thisgilded serpent.
For your claim, fairsister,
I bar it in the interestof my wife.
'Tis she is subcontractedto this lord,
and I, her husband,contradict your bans.
If you would marry, makeyour love to me;
my lady is bespoke.
An interlude!
Thou art armed,Gloucester.
Let the trumpet sound.
If none appear to proveupon thy person
thy heinous, manifest, andmany treasons,
there is my pledge:
I'll make it on thy heart'ere I taste bread,
thou art in nothing lessthan I have hereproclaimed thee.
Sick, O, sick!
If not, I'll ne'er trustmedicine.
There's my exchange.
What in the world he isthat names me traitor,
villain-like, he lies.
Call by thy trumpet.
He that dares approach onhim, on you, who not
I will maintain my truthand honor firmly.
A herald, ho!
Trust to thy singlevirtue,
for thy soldiers, alllevied in my name,
have, in my name, tooktheir discharge.
My sickness grows upon me.
She is not well; conveyher to my tent.
Come hither, herald.
Let the trumpet sound, andread out this.
"If any man of quality ordegree within the lists ofthe army
"will maintain uponEdmund, supposed Earl ofGloucester,
"that he is a manifoldtraitor,
"let him appear by thethird sound of thetrumpet.
He is bold in hisdefense."
Sound!
Again!
Ask him his purposes
and why he appears uponthis call o' the trumpet.
What are you:
your name, your quality,
and why you answer thispresent summons?
Know, my name is lost,
by treason's toothbare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as theadversary I come to cope.
Which is that adversary?
What's he that speaks forEdmund, Earl ofGloucester?
Himself. What say'st thouto him?
Draw thy sword that, if myspeech offend a nobleheart,
thy arm may do theejustice.
Here is mine.
Behold, it is theprivilege
of mine honors, my oath,and my profession.
I protest, maugre thystrength, youth, place,and eminence
despite thy victor swordand fire-new fortune,
thy valor and thy heart,thou art a traitor,
false to thy gods, thybrother, and thy father;
conspirant 'gainst thishigh-illustrious prince;
and, from the extremistupward of thy head
to the descent and dustbelow thy foot,
a most toad-spottedtraitor.
Say thou "no,"
this sword, this arm, andmy best spirits
are bent to prove upon thyheart,
whereto I speak, thouliest.
In wisdom, I should askthy name.
But since thy outsidelooks so fair and warlike
and that thy tongue somesay of breeding breathes,
what safe and nicely Imight well delay
by rule of knighthood, Idisdain and spurn.
Back do I toss thesetreasons to thy head
with the hell-hated lieo'erwhelm thy heart;
which, for they yet glanceby and scarcely bruise,
this sword of mine shallgive them instant way,
where they shall restforever.
Trumpets, speak.
Save him. Save him!
This is practice,Gloucester.
By the laws of war, thouwast not bound
to answer an unknownopposite.
Thou art not vanquishedbut cozened and beguiled.
Shut your mouth, dame.
Or with this paper shall Istop it.
Hold, sir.
Thou worse than any name,read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady.
I perceive you know it.
Say, if I do, the laws aremine, not thine.
Who can arraign me for it?
Most monstrous.
Oh, know'st thou thispaper?
Ask me not what I know.
Go after her. She'sdesperate; govern her.
What you have charged mewith, that have I done,
and more, much more.
The time will bring itout.
'Tis past, and so am I.
But what art thou thathast this fortune on me?
If thou art noble, I doforgive thee.
I am no less in blood thanthou art, Edmund.
If more, the more thouhast wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thyfather's son.
The gods are just
and, of our pleasantvices, make instruments toplague us.
The dark and vicious placewhere thee he got
cost him his eyes.
Thou hast spoken right;'tis true.
The wheel is come fullcircle.
I am here.
Methought thy very gaitdid prophesy a royalnobleness.
I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart
if ever I did hate thee orthy father.
Worthy prince, I know it.
Where have you hidyourself?
How have you known themiseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord.
List a brief tale, andwhen 'tis told,
O, that my heart wouldburst.
The bloody proclamation toescape
that followed me so near
O, our lives' sweetness.
That we the pain of deathhourly would die
rather than die at once
led me to move into amadman's rags,
to assume a semblance thatvery dogs disdained.
And in this habit met I myfather
with his bleeding ringstheir precious stones newlost.
Became his guide, led him,begged for him,
saved him from despair.
Never fault! revealedmyself unto him
until some half-hour past,when I was armed.
Not sure, though hoping,of this good success,
I asked his blessing andtold him all mypilgrimage.
But his flawed heart,alack,
too weak the conflict tosupport,
'twixt two extremes ofpassion, joy and grief,burst smilingly.
Help, help, oh, help!
What kind of help? Speak,man.
What means this bloodyknife?
'Tis hot; it smokes.
It came even from theheart of
she's dead!
Who dead? Speak, man.
Your lady, sir, your lady.
And her sister by her ispoisoned.
She confesses it.
I was contracted to themboth.
All three now marry in aninstant.
Produce their bodies, bethey alive or dead.
This judgment of theheavens, which makes ustremble,
touches us not with pity.
Here comes Kent.
Oh, is this he?
The time will not allowthe compliment
which very manners urges.
I am come to bid my kingand master aye good night.
Is he not here?
Great thing of us forgot.
Speak, Edmund. Where's theking?
And where's Cordelia?
Yet Edmund was beloved.
The one, the otherpoisoned for my sake
and after slew herself.
I pant for life.
Some good I mean to do,despite of mine ownnature.
Quickly send be brief init to the castle,
for my writ is on the lifeof Lear and on Cordelia.
Nay, send in time.
To who, my lord? Who hasthe office?
Send thy token ofreprieve.
Well thought on.
Take my sword; give it thecaptain.
Haste thee, for thy life.
He hath commission fromthy wife and me
to hang Cordelia in theprison
and to lay the blame uponher own despair,
that she fordid herself.
The gods defend her.
Bear him hence awhile.
Howl!
Howl, howl!
O, you are men of stones!
Had I your tongues andeyes, I'd use them so
that heaven's vault shouldcrack!
She's gone forever.
I know when one is deadand when one lives.
She's dead as earth.
Lend me a looking-glass.
If that her breath shouldmist or stain the stone,
why, then she lives.
Is this the promised end?
Or image of that horror?
Fall, and cease.
This feather stirs; shelives!
If it be so, it is achance
which does redeem all sorrowsthat ever I have felt.
O my good master!
Prithee, away.
'Tis noble Kent, yourfriend.
A plague upon youmurderers, traitors all!
I might have saved her.
Now she's gone forever.
Cordelia, Cordelia.
Stay a little.
Ha!
What is't thou say'st?
Her voice was ever soft,gentle, and low,
an excellent thing inwoman.
I killed the slave thatwas a-hanging thee.
'Tis true, my lords, hedid.
Did I not, fellow?
I have known the day,
with my good bitingfalchion, I'd have madethem skip.
I am old now,
and these same crossesspoil me.
Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o' thebest; I'll tell youstraight.
If fortune brag of two sheloved and hated,
one of them, we behold.
This is a dull sight.
Are you not Kent?
The same, your servantKent.
Where is your servantCaius?
He's a good fellow.
He'll strike, and quicklytoo.
He's dead and rotten.
No, my good lord; I am thevery man.
I'll see that straight.
That, from your first ofdifference and decay,
have followed your sadsteps.
You are welcome hither.
Nor no man else.
All's cheerless, dark, anddeadly.
Your eldest daughters havefordone themselves
and desperately are dead.
Aye, so I think.
He knows not what he says.
And vain is it that wepresent us to him.
Very bootless.
Edmund is dead, my lord.
That's but a trifle here.
You lords and noblefriends, know our intent.
What comfort to this greatdecay may come shall beapplied.
For us we will resign,
during the life of thisold majesty,
to him our absolute poweryou, to your rights
with boot and suchaddition
as your honors have morethan merited.
All friends shall tastethe wages of their virtue
and all foes the cup oftheir deservings.
O, see, see.
My poor fool is hanged.
No.
No, no life.
Why should a dog, a horse,a rat have life
and thou no breath at all?
Thou'lt come no more
never,
never, never,
never!
Pray you, undo thisbutton.
Thank you, sir.
Do you see this?
Look on her, look, herlips.
Look there! Look there!
He faints!
My lord, my lord!
Break, heart; I prithee,break!
Look up, my lord.
Vex not his ghost.
O, let him pass.
He hates him that wouldupon the rack
of this tough worldstretch him out longer.
He is gone, indeed.
The wonder is he hathendured so long.
He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence.
Our present business isgeneral woe.
Friends of my soul, youtwain rule in this realm
and the gored statesustain.
I have a journey, sir,shortly to go.
My master calls me; I mustnot say no.
The weight of this sadtime, we must obey.
Speak what we feel, notwhat we ought to say.
The oldest hath bornemost.
We that are young
shall never see so much,nor live so long.